
Section 284 of the Patent Act provides:
Upon finding for the claimant the court shall award the claimant damages adequate to compensate for the infringement but in no event less than a reasonable royalty for the use made of the invention by the infringer, together with interest and costs as fixed by the court.
When the damages are not found by a jury, the court shall assess them. In either event the court may increase the damages up to three times the amount found or assessed. Increased damages under this paragraph shall not apply to provisional rights under section 154(d) of this title.

The court may receive expert testimony as an aid to the determination of damages or of what royalty would be reasonable under the circumstances.
Section 286 establishes a six-year statute of limitations, barring patentees from recovering damages for any infringing acts committed more than six years prior to the filing of the complaint or counterclaim for infringement.

Courts apply two principal approaches for measuring damages "adequate to compensate" for a defendant's infringement: lost profits and reasonable royaltics.

# i. Lost Profits 

Courts have struggled with the problem of setting appropriate measures of damages for past infringement. In Panduit Corp. v. Stahlin Bros. Fibre Works, Inc., 575 F.2d 1152, 1158 n. 5 (6th Cir. 1978), the court adopted an oft-used four-factor test for determining lost profits:

To obtain as damages the profits on sales he would have made absent the infringement, i.e., the sales made by the infringer, a patent owner must prove:
(1) demand for the patented product, (2) absence of acceptable noninfringing substitutes, (3) his manufacturing and marketing capability to exploit the demand, and (4) the amount of the profit he would have made.

Non-practicing entitics cannot satisfy this test. Thus, they are limited to a reasonable royalty, which we discuss below.

Price Erosion. The per-unit profit that the patentee would have earned can be difficult to estimate because the infringer's activity has created competition that would not have otherwise occurred in the market. Consequently, the patentee may also recover additional lost profits damages under a price erosion theory. See Crystal Semiconductor Corp. v. TriTech Microelectronics Int'l, Inc., 246 F.3d 1336, 1357 (Fed. Cir. 2001). To recover for price erosion damages, a patentee is required to prove that "but for" the infringement, she would have sold her patented invention at a higher price. Furthermore, the patentee must prove the number of products she would have sold at this price. Accordingly, "the patentee's price erosion theory must account for the nature, or definition, of the market, similarities between any benchmark market and the market in which price erosion is alleged, and the effect of the hypothetically increased price on the likely number of sales at that price in that market."

What assumption does this theory make about the demand for the patentee's product? Wouldn't you expect the number of units sold to decline as the price increases?

Market-Share Rule. When more than two sellers share a market and at least one seller is a non-infringing competitor of the patentee, it would appear that one element in the Panduit test is missing: the absence of noninfringing substitutes. Courts can, however, inquire into what would have happened if the infringer had not been in the market. Under this theory, the court is asked to assume that the patentee's market share relative to the noninfringer would have remained the same in the absence of the infringer. Consequently, it is assumed that the patentee would have made the same percentage of the infringer's sales as the patentee made in the overall market. See, e.g., State Indus. v. Mor-Flo, Inc., 883 F.2d 1573 (Fed. Cir. 1988); Roy J. Epstein, The Market Share Rule with Price Erosion: Patent Infringement Lost Profits Damages After Crystal, 31 AIPLA Q.J. 1 (2003).

Lost Sales of Unpatented Components or Products. A patentee may also recover for lost profits on unpatented components sold with a patented product, so-called "convoyed sales." See Rite-Hite Corp. v. Kelley Co., 56 F.3d 1538, 1546 (Fed. Cir. 1995) (en banc) ("[i]f a particular injury was or should have been reasonably foreseeable by an infringing competitor in the relevant market, broadly defined, that injury is generally compensable absent a persuasive reason to the contrary.")

# COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS 

1. The Federal Circuit decision in Grain Processing Corp. v. American Maize Products Co., 185 F.3d 1341 (Fed. Cir. 1999) elucidates the requirement that there be no acceptable noninfringing substitutes. Plaintiff Grain Processing was the holder of a patent on a form of maltodextrin, a food additive used in frostings, syrups, drinks, cereals, and frozen foods. After finding infringement, Judge Frank Easterbrook of the Seventh Circuit (sitting by designation on the district court) denied the patentee lost profits damages. Judge Easterbrook found that although the infringer did not in fact sell a noninfringing alternative during the damages period, it easily could have. The Federal Circuit affirmed, opening the way for accused infringers to argue more freely about hypothetical scenarios that might have played out if they had known they were infringing.

In summary, this court requires reliable economic proof of the market that establishes an accurate context to project the likely results "but for" the infringement. The availability of substitutes invariably will influence the market forces defining this "but for" marketplace, as it did in this case. Moreover, a substitute need not be openly on sale to exert this influence. Thus, with proper economic proof of availability, as American Maize provided the district court in this case, an acceptable substitute not on the market during the infringement may nonetheless become part of the lost profits calculus and therefore limit or preclude those damages.
185 F.3d at 1356.
It should be noted that the facts in Grain Processing made it particularly easy to make a persuasive case that the noninfringing substitute would very likely have been employed by the infringer. The technology was well understood-so much so that the infringer switched to a noninfringing version of the product within two weeks of being ordered to do so by the district court; buyers and consumers of maltodextrin did not value the features of the claimed product in a way that set it apart from other versions, making other versions good substitutes; and the accused infringer had especially convincing proof that it could easily have ramped up production of the noninfringing alternative.

The Federal Circuit reaffirmed and applied Grain Processing in Crystal Semiconductor Corp. v. Tritech Microelectronics Int'l, Inc., 246 F.3d 1336, 1358-60 (Fed. Cir. 2001) (affirming trial court findings and emphasizing need to analyze market reaction to patented technology). But the court also made clear in a subsequent case that it was serious about the need for the infringer to prove that the noninfringing substitute was readily available. See Micro Chemical, Inc. v. Lextron, Inc., 318 F.3d 1119, 1123 (Fed. Cir. 2003) (reversing a trial court finding of ready availability under Grain Processing); John W. Schlicher, Measuring Patent Damages by the Market Value of Inventions-The Grain Processing, Rite-Hite, and Aro Rules, 82 J. Pat. \& Trademark Off. SOC'Y 503 (2000).
2. Lost Foreign Profits. After the Supreme Court held that there could be no liability for shipping the components of a patented device outside of the United States for purposes of assembly abroad, see Deepsouth Packing Co. v. Laitram Corp., 406 U.S. 518 (1972), Congress added §271 (f) to extend liability for supplying unassembled "components" from the United States for "combination" outside the United States where the same combination would infringe a patent if it occurred within the United States. The two prongs of infringement under §271 (f) are similar to active inducement and contributory infringement found in §§271 (b), (c). In WesternGeco LLC v. ION Geophysical Corp., 585 U.S. 407 (2018), the Supreme Court held that the presumption that federal statutes "apply only within the territorial jurisdiction of the United States" did not bar award of lost foreign profits where the defendant (ION Geophysical) manufactured components in the United States that it shipped to customers abroad for assembly of an infringing system (an undersea surveying device). Justice Thomas reasoned that because §284 provides "damages adequate to compensate for the infringement," the focus of this statute is "the infringement." The Court viewed the supplying of the components, which occurred in the United States, as the infringement even though the profits from that domestic act were earned abroad. The Court left open the possibility that the exterritorial reach of the statute could be limited by proximate cause.

# ii. Reasonable Royalty 

## a. The Basic Inquiry

Section 284 provides that the patent owner is entitled to "damages adequate to compensate for the infringement, but in no event less than a reasonable royalty for the use made of the invention by the infringer." Thus, when lost profits cannot be proved, the patent owner is entitled to a reasonable royalty. A reasonable royalty is an amount "which a person, desiring to manufacture and sell a patented article, as a business proposition, would be willing to pay as a royalty and yet be able to make and sell the patented article, in the market, at a reasonable profit." Goodycar Tire and Rubber Co. v. Overman Cushion Tire Co., 95 F.2d 978 at 984 (6th Cir. 1937) (citing Ruchwood v.
General Fire Extinguisher Co., 37 F.2d 62 at 66 (2d Cir. 1930)), appeal dismissed, 306 U.S. 665 (1938).
"A "reasonable royalty" contemplates a hypothetical negotiation between the patentee and the infringer at a time before the infringement began. [T]his analysis necessarily involves some approximation of the market as it would have hypothetically developed absent infringement. This analysis, in turn, requires sound economic and factual predicates." Riles v. Shell Exploration and Production Co., 298 F.3d 1302, 1311 (Fed. Cir. 2002). "In a normal negotiation, the potential licensee has three basic choices: forgo all use of the invention; pay an agreed royalty; infringe the patent and risk litigation." Fromson v. Western Litho Plate and Supply Co., 853 F.2d 1568, 1576 (Fed. Cir. 1988). In a hypothetical negotiation, however, the factfinder "presumes that the licensee has made the second choice, when in fact it made the third." Id. Commentators-and some courts-have noted that this standard would disadvantage a patentee if a court were "to pretend that the infringement never happened." TWM Mfg. Co. v. Dura Corp., 789 F.2d 895, 900 (Fed. Cir. 1986). As a consequence, courts keep in mind that the hypothetical negotiation approach "must be flexibly applied as a device in the aid of justice." Id. (internal quotations omitted).

In practice, however, the choice is only rarely between infringing and taking a license. Most patent defendants are not copiers but independent inventors. Had they been aware of the patent when they developed their product, these independent inventors might have had another choice: pick an alternative way of implementing the invention that is not subject to the patent. For that reason, the reasonable royalty should logically be limited by the value of the patent over the available noninfringing alternatives, just as those alternatives constrain the ability to recover lost profits. See Grain Processing Corp. v. American Maize-Prods. Co., 185 F.3d 1341 (Fed. Cir. 1999).

This means that courts walk a fine line when awarding reasonable royalties: between undercompensating the patentee by resort to a purely fictional negotiation which takes place outside the shadow of any actual infringement and awarding damages far in excess of industry standards, the negotiating positions of the parties, and other real world constraints. In addition, although the cases sometimes hint at a quasi-punitive component in a reasonable royalty calculation, the statute provides for an explicit "multiplier" only in the case of willful infringement.

A number of commentators and industry representatives have argued that the problem is not undercompensation, but overcompensation, particularly where a patentee owns a patent on a small component but can measure damages based on the sale of a large, multi-component product. See Mark A. Lemley \& Carl Shapiro, Patent Holdup and Royalty Stacking, 85 TEX. L. REV. 1991 (2007). Indeed, if the right measure of royalty is based on the value of the patented invention over the available noninfringing alternatives, the true value of the invention might be zero in many cases. See Daniel L. Brean, Ending Unreasonable Royalties: Why Nominal Damages are Adequate to Compensate Patent Assertion Entities for Infringement, 39 Vt. L. Rev. 867 (2015). Nevertheless, courts almost always award some royalty, Apple Corp. v. Motorola, Inc., 757 F.3d 1286 (Fed. Cir. 2014), and they have been unsympathetic to infringers who argue that the patentee's proposed royalty would have meant that the infringer would have lost money on sales of the product. See, e.g., Golight, Inc. v. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., 355 F.3d 1327, 1338 (Fed. Cir. 2004); Monsanto Co. v. Ralph, 382 F.3d 1374, 1384 (Fed. Cir. 2004) ("[T]he law does not require that an infringer be permitted to make a profit. And, where, as here, a patentee is unwilling to grant an unlimited license, the hypothetical negotiation process has its limits.").

Several problems have emerged in determining a reasonably royalty. The principal methodology relies on a broad and open-ended set of factors. Beyond these factors, courts have struggled with apportioning value within patented products. A third issue relates to valuation of patents that are part of a pool of patents governed by fair, reasonable, and non-discriminatory (FRAND) licensing agreements. We discuss each in the sections that follow.

# b. The Georgia-Pacific Factors 

Setting reasonable royaltics entails a detailed review of the technology at issue, the bargaining positions of the parties, and other factors that might have been relevant if the hypothetical negotiation had actually taken place. The district court in Georgia-Pacific v. U.S. Plywood Corp., 318 F.Supp. 1116, 1120 (S.D.N.Y. 1970), enumerated a broad, nonexclusive list of factors that has been widely followed:

1. The royalties received by the patentee for the licensing of the patent in suit. proving or tending to prove an established royalty.
2. The rates paid by the licensee for the use of other patents comparable to the patent in suit.
3. The nature and scope of the license, as exclusive or non-exclusive: or as restricted or non-restricted in terms of territory or with respect to whom the manufactured product may be sold.
4. The licensor's established policy and marketing program to maintain his patent monopoly by not licensing others to use the invention or by granting licenses under special conditions designed to preserve that monopoly.
5. The commercial relationship between the licensor and licensee, such as. whether they are competitors in the same territory in the same line of business; or whether they are inventor and promoter.
6. The effect of selling the patented specialty in promoting sales of other products of the licensee; that existing value of the invention to the licensor as a generator of sales of his non-patented items; and the extent of such derivative or convoyed sales.
7. The duration of the patent and the term of the license.
8. The established profitability of the product made under the patent, its commercial success, and its current popularity.
9. The utility and advantages of the patent property over the old modes or devices, if any, that had been used for working out similar results.
10. The nature of the patented invention, the character of the commercial embodiment of it as owned and produced by the licensor, and the benefits to those who have used the invention.
11. The extent to which the infringer has made use of the invention, and any evidence probative of the value of that use.
12. The portion of the profit or of the selling price that may be customary in the particular business or in comparable businesses to allow for the use of the invention or analogous inventions.
13. The portion of the realizable profit that should be credited to the invention as distinguished from non-patented elements, the manufacturing process, business risks, or significant features or improvements added by the infringer.
14. The opinion testimony of qualified experts.
15. The amount that a licensor (such as the patentec) and a licensee (such as the infringer) would have agreed upon (at the time the infringement began) if both had been reasonably and voluntarily trying to reach an agreement; that is, the amount which a prudent licensee-who desired, as a business proposition, to obtain a license to manufacture and sell a particular article embodying the patented invention-would have been willing to pay as a royalty and yet be able to make a reasonable profit and which amount would have been acceptable by a prudent patentee who was willing to grant a license.
Id. at 1120 .

# COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS 

1. Circularity of Reasonable Royalty? While it seems to make sense to base a royalty on what other parties were negotiating for similar rights, those license negotiations themselves will be driven by what the parties think will happen if they don't come to terms and the dispute goes to court, not what parties would have agreed to under the assumption that the patent was valid and infringed. See Jonathan Masur, The Use and Misuse of Patent Licenses, 110 Nw. U. L. Rev. 1115 (2015).
2. Multiplicity of Factors. Courts seek to ensure that the royalty rate is based on sound economic methodology and grounded in reliable and pertinent evidence. Using the construct of the hypothetical negotiation between a willing licensor and licensee, experts use the Georgia-Pacific factors to determine a license rate that would have been agreed upon just before the infringement began (and based on the assumption that the patent was valid, infringed, and enforceable). The proof of an appropriate royalty rate using this method allows for necessary "approximation and uncertainty." Aqua Shield v. Inter Pool Cover Team, 774 F.3d 766, 771 (Fed. Cir. 2014). Nevertheless, it must be supported by substantial evidence, which usually will be based on the application of the relevant subset of the Georgia-Pacific factors. See WhitServe, LLC, v. Computer Packages, Inc., 694 F.3d 10, 31-32 (Fed. Cir. 2012).
The open-ended Georgia-Pacific framework affords economic experts substantial leeway in determining a royalty rate. The most pertinent evidence usually comprises past licenses to the infringing or comparable technology, the value of comparable features in the marketplace, an estimate of the value of the benefit provided by the infringed features by comparison to non-infringing alternatives, or an estimate of the cost to design around the patent. See, e.g., Ericsson, 773 F.3d at 1227 (citing Monsanto Co. v. McFarling, 488 F.3d 973, 978 (Fed. Cir. 2007) ("An established royalty is usually the best measure of a 'reasonable' royalty for a given use of an invention ..."). However, license agreements that are unrelated to the claimed invention cannot form the basis of a reasonable royalty calculation. See, e.g., Lucent, 580 F.3d at 1327; see also ResQNet, 594 F.3d at 869 ("Any evidence unrelated to the claimed invention does not support compensation for infringement but punishes beyond the reach of the statute."). The Federal Circuit has observed that licenses arising out of litigation might be reliable in certain circumstances, but has cautioned that "litigation itself can skew the results of the hypothetical negotiation." ResQNet, 594 F.3d at 872.

In many cases, the technology either has not been previously licensed or the licenses cover a broader range of technologies than the patented invention and/or multiple product or product components. As an alternative or shortcut to considering the Georgia-Pacific factors, some patentees have put forward general royalty theories such as the 25% "rule of thumb" and the Nash Bargaining Solution ( 50% split of net product value). The Federal Circuit has rejected the application of these generalized "rules of thumb." See Apple, 757 F.3d at 1324-25; VirnetX, 767 F.3d at 1331-34 (rejecting the Nash Bargaining Solution); Uniloc, 632 F.3d at 1312 (rejecting the " 25% Rule"). Such evidence is inadmissible.

The Georgia-Pacific factors are so numerous, complex, and mind-numbing that jurors have difficulty understanding how to juggle so many considerations. The Federal Circuit Bar Association's January 2016 Model Jury Instructions have boiled down the factors:

# 6.7 Reasonable Royalty—Relevant Factors 

In determining the reasonable royalty, you should consider all the facts known and available to the parties at the time the infringement began. Some of the kinds of factors that you may consider in making your determination are:
(1) The value that the claimed invention contributes to the accused product.
(2) The value that factors other than the claimed invention contribute to [the accused product].
(3) Comparable license agreements, such as those covering the use of the claimed invention or similar technology.
This concise and focused instruction provides a more balanced and comprehensible set of considerations than the Georgia-Pacific laundry list. Does it leave any important considerations out? Cf. Norman Siebrasse and Thomas Cotter, A New Frumework for Determining Reasonable Royalties in Patent Litigation, Fla. L. Rev. (forthcoming 2016); William Lee and A. Douglas Melamed, Breaking the Vicious Cyle of Pateint Damages, 101 Cornell L. Rev. 385 (2016); David O. Taylor, Using Reasonable Royalties to Value Patented Technology, 49 GA. L. REV. 79 (2014); Daralyn J. Durie \& Mark A. Lemley, A Structured Approach to Calculating Reasonable Royalties, 14 LEWIS \& CLARK L. REV. 627 (2010) (suggesting that these three factors can explain royalty calculations).
3. Reliability of Expert Testimony. Federal Rule of Evidence 702 and the Supreme Court's Daubert test (Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 509 U.S. 579 (1993)) for reliability of scientific expert testimony apply to economic expert evidence on damages. See Lucent Techs., Inc. v. Gateway, Inc., 580 F.3d 1301 (Fed. Cir. 2009). The Lucent case involved a patent on a minor component (the pop-up calendar, or "date picker" function) of a complex software product (Microsoft's Outlook email scheduling and calendaring program). The jury had awarded over $500 million in damages, in part on the basis of licensing agreements from the computer industry that bore little relationship to the hypothetical license negotiation that served as the foundation of the damages award in the case. The Federal Circuit reversed the trial court's denial of a post-trial motion to reject the jury verdict. Henceforth, the court instructed, judges must actively supervise the introduction of "comparable licensing" evidence so that it is truly comparable, and therefore capable of grounding a truly reasonable royalty finding.

While estimating a reasonable royalty is not an "exact science" in that there may be more than one reliable method, Apple Inc. v. Motorola, Inc., 757 F.3d 1286, 1315 (Fed. Cir. 2014), the Federal Circuit has enhanced the judge's gatekeeping role to prevent excessive awards. Recent decisions have sought to align the royalty base to the patented component of a product, exclude unreliable damage theories, scrutinize the admissibility of various forms of evidence, and provide limiting jury instructions.

In EcoFactor, Inc. v. Google LLC, 137 F.4th 133 (Fed. Cir. 2025 (en banc), the Federal Circuit overturned (and remanded) a damages award on the ground that the district court should have excluded the patentee's damages expert's testimony as unreliable. A majority of the Federal Circuit held that the district court abused its discretion in admitting into expert testimony using prior lump sum licensing agreements as a basis for proffering an opinion as to a per unit royalty where the agreements expressly disclaimed that the lump sum payments were based on a per-unit royalty.

# c. Royalty Base and Apportionment 

A reasonable royalty calculation will typically require determining the royalty base and the royalty rate. The determination is relatively straightforward where the demand for a final product comprises a single patented technology, such as a drug with a patented active ingredient. The most sensible royalty base in that case would typically be total sales revenue for the final product. See Fonar Corp. v. Gen. Elec. Co., 107 F.3d 1543, 1552 (Fed. Cir. 1997) (citing Rite-Hite Corp. v. Kelley Co., 56 F.3d 1538, 1549 (Fed. Cir. 1995) (en banc)). The royalty rate would account for alternative treatments (of which there may be few), marketing costs, and manufacturing costs to determine what percentage of that base is attributable to the patent.
Patent law has long struggled to deal with apportioning patent value where a patent covers only one component of a larger product. See Cincinnati Car Co. v. New York Rapid Transit Corp., 66 F.2d 592, 593 (2d Cir. 1933) (Learned Hand, J.) (observing that the allocation of profits among multiple components "is in its nature unanswerable"). The problem has become particularly acute in modern patent litigation as a result of the growing use of juries called upon to apportion value based on complex and often widely divergent economic expert analyses.

In theory, a wide range of royalty bases can be appropriate with an appropriated calibrated royalty rate to account for the myriad factors affecting consumer demand. In practice, however, the open-ended nature of the Georgia-Pacific framework can lead to wildly divergent royalty calculations by expert economists. Especially in a jury trial, such testimony can produce outsized damage awards. As the Supreme Court recognized long ago, it would be "very grave error to instruct a jury 'that as to the measure of damages the same rule is to govern, whether the patent covers an entire machine or an improvement on a machine.'" Seymore v. McCormick, 57 U.S. 480, 491 (1853); see also Westinghouse Elec. \& Mfg. Co. v. Wagner Co., 225 U.S. 604, 614-15 (1912) ("[The] invention may have been used in combination with valuable improvements made, or other patents appropriated by the infringer, and each may have jointly, but unequally contributed to the profits. In such case, if plaintiff's patent only created a part of the profits, he is only entitled to recover that part of the net gains."); Garretson v. Clark, 111 U.S. 120, 121 (1884) ("When a patent is for an improvement, and not for an entirely new machine or contrivance, the patentee must show in what particulars his improvement has added to the usefulness of the machine or contrivance.)

In general, a patent holder seeking a reasonable royalty must provide substantial evidence supporting both its choice of royalty base and royalty rate. "[W]here multicomponent products are involved, the governing rule is that the ultimate combination of royalty base and royalty rate must reflect the value attributable to the infringing features of the product, and no more." Ericsson, Inc., v. D-Link Sys., Inc., 773 F.3d 1201, 1226 (Fed. Cir. 2014) (citing VirnetX, Inc. v. Cisco Sys., Inc., 767 F.3d 1308 (Fed. Cir. 2014)).

As the Federal Circuit has warned, "reliance on the entire market value might mislead the jury, who may be less equipped to understand the extent to which the royalty rate would need to do the work in such instances." Ericsson, 773 F.3d at 1227 (citing LaserDynamics, Inc. v. Quanta Computer, Inc., 694 F.3d 51, 67, 68 (Fed. Cir. 2012) (barring the use of too high a royalty base-even if mathematically offset by a "'low enough royalty rate'"-because such a base "carries a considerable risk" of misleading a jury into overcompensating, stating that such a base "cannot help but skew the damages horizon for the jury'" and "make a patentee's proffered damages amount appear modest by comparison" (quoting Uniloc USA, Inc. v. Microsoft Corp., 632 F.3d 1292, 1320 (Fed. Cir. 2011))).

To cabin the risk of outsize awards in multi-component cases, the Federal Circuit has pushed the royalty base toward the smallest salable patent practicing unit or "SSPPU." See Cornell Univ. v. Hewlett-Packard Co., 609 F.Supp.2d 279 (N.D.N.Y. 2009) (Rader, J., sitting by designation). The Federal Circuit embraced the SSPPL' framework in LaserDynamics Inc. v. Quanta Computer, Inc., 694 F.3d 51 (Fed. Cir. 2012), holding that "it is generally required that royalties be based not on the entire product, but instead on the 'smallest salable patent-practicing unit.' ... The entire market value rule is a narrow exception to this general rule." Id. at 67; see also VirnetX, Inc., v. Cisco Sys., Inc., 767 F.3d 1308, 1328-29 (Fed. Cir. 2014); LaserDynamics, Inc., v. Quanta Comput., Inc., 694 F.3d 51, 66-70 (Fed. Cir. 2012); Uniloc USA, Inc. v. Microsoft Corp., 632 F.3d 1292, 1320 (Fed. Cir. 2011); Lucent Techs., Inc. v. Gateway, Inc., 580 F.3d 1301, 1336 (Fed. Cir. 2009).

Damages experts have begun to deploy consumer surveys to allocate value within multi-component patented products. See Zelin Yang, Note, Damaging Royalties: An Overview of Reasonable Royalty Damages, 29 Berkeley Tech. L.J. 647, 664 (2014); S. Christian Platt \& Bob Chen, Recent Trends and Approaches in Calculating Patent Damages: Nash Bargaining Solution and Conjoint Surveys, 86 Patent, Trademark \& COPYRIGHT J. (BNA) 909 (Aug. 30, 2013). Marketing researchers have long used "conjoint analysis" to differentiate value within product configurations. See Paul E. Green, Abba M. Krieger \& Yoram Wind, Thirty Years of Conjoint Analysis: Reflections and Prospects, 31 Interfaces 56 (2001); Paul E. Green \& V. Srinivasan, Conjoint Analysis in Marketing: New Developments with Implications for Research and Practice, 54(4) J. OF MARKETING 3 (1990). Conjoint analysis draws upon consumer ranking of products with different features. Researchers use statistical methods to estimate consumers' willingness to pay for particular attributes. While these methods provide a logical framework for differentiating value, the technique can be limited in practice. See Patricia Dyck, Beyond Confusion-Survey Evidence of Consumer Demand and the Entire Market Value Rule, 4 Hastings Sci. \& Tech. L.J. 209, 226 (2012) (noting sensitivity to data collection methods and algorithms and the problem of combinatorial explosion); Lisa Cameron, Michael Cragg \& Daniel McFadden, The Role of Conjoint Surveys in Reasonable Royalty Cases, LAW360 (Oct. 16, 2013).

Courts have been cautiously receptive to conjoint analysis. See Oracle Am., Inc. v. Google, Inc., No. C 10-03571 WHA, 2012 WL 850705, at *10-*14 (N.D. Cal. Mar. 13, 2012)(rejecting some of Oracle's expert's conjoint analysis as unreliable while allowing some of it to be admitted); TV Interactive Data Corp. v. Sony Corp., 929 F.Supp.2d 1006, 1019-25 (N.D. Cal. 2013) (holding the patentee's expert testimony using conjoint analysis to be admissible).

One limitation on the apportionment principle is that a sufficiently comparable prior license may dispense with the need to engage in apportionment at all. See Pavo Solutions LLC v. Kingston Tech. Co., 35 F.4th 1367 (Fed. Cir. 2022). The theory is that if prior parties negotiated over this particular patent in the context of very similar technology, they probably took apportionment into account in setting the license royalty rate.

# d. FRAND Licenses 

A growing number of technologies arise within the context of network industries in which standard protocols and interfaces promote technological innovation and greater consumer value. Industry standard-setting organizations such as the Institute of Electrical Electronics Engineers (IEEE) and the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) bring together company representatives to develop industry standards. To ensure that the industry standards reflect the best technologies while avoiding (or at least postponing) licensing disputes, the participants typically commit to license standardessential patents (SEPs) on "reasonable and non-discriminatory" (RAND) or "fair, reasonable and non-discriminatory" (FRAND) terms. The standard-setting organizations have typically left the parameters for determining FRAND license terms undefined, see Mark A. Lemley, Intellectual Property Rights and Standard-Setting Organizations, 90 CAL. L. REV. 1889, 1906 (2002), leaving courts with the difficult task of determining licensing rates for highly complex products involving potentially hundreds of patents.

The valuation of SEPs presents distinct problems. Industry standards can encompass hundreds of patented technologies of varying significance. Not surprisingly, owners of patents within a SEP pool often see their patents as particularly valuable, thereby risking hold-up and undue royalty stacking. The challenge lies in separating the value of the particular technology from the often-tremendous value from standardization. Once consumers adopt a product, they become locked into the standard to varying degrees. This could provide the patentee tremendous leverage in a negotiation. With potentially hundreds of SEPs and dozens of patent owners, the problem becomes intractable if patent owners stake out aggressive positions or refuse to propose licensing terms.

In a series of recent cases, courts have surmounted this challenge by interpreting the principal goal of standard-setting agreements to be widespread adoption of the standard, thereby barring FRAND licensors from capturing the coordination and network value of the standard. See Microsoft Corp. v. Motorola, Inc., No. C10-1823JLR, 2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 60233, 2013 WL 2111217 (W.D. Wash. Apr. 25, 2013); see also Ericsson, 773 F.3d at 1229-35; In re Innovatio IP Ventures LLC Patent Litig., No. 11 C 930S, 2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 144061, 2013 WL 5593609 (N.D. Ill. Oct. 3, 2013). The courts have adapted the Georgia-Pacific factors to serve the standard-setting context. Professor Robert Merges and Professor Jeffery Kuhn have suggested that the estoppel concept ought to be extended to situations where the holder of a standard-essential patent leads third parties into adopting a standard with promises of non-enforcement, and then enforces vigorously when those parties are "locked in" to the standard. See Robert P. Merges and Jeffery M. Kuhn, An Estoppel Doctrine for Patented Standards, 97 CAL. L. REV. 1 (2009).