
The "specification" is the text of the patent. It describes the invention. It names all the parts or components of the invention, describes how they work, and illustrates how they work together to perform the invention's function. Most patents also have one or more drawings. Only at the end of the specification does the inventor (or, more usually, her patent lawyer) state the precise legal definition of the invention. These are the claims.
"Claims" are the heart of patent law. Claims define the boundaries of the intangible property right that the patent confers. Accordingly, innumerable patent cases therefore analogize claims to the "metes and bounds" of a real property deed. Patentees almost always write multiple claims for each patent-approximately 15 on average, with some bioscience patents running into the hundreds of claims. (The filing fee allows up to three independent claims and 20 total claims; additional claims incur additional fees.)

Each claim is its own legal entitlement. Thus, even if some claims are later ruled invalid, the other claims remain in force. Therefore, writing multiple claims affords patentees multiple tries at defining their legal rights. Broad claims can secure vast swaths of "intangible property," but risk being "anticipated" (invalidated) by prior art. Narrow claims reduce such risk, but can be circumvented by competitors who navigate around claim restrictions (non-infringement). Patent drafters craft their claims with an eye toward both risks.

The claims section of a patent commonly begins with the broadest claim, which is then "qualified" through a series of narrower dependent claims. This is typically followed by a narrower independent claim, which may itself be qualified by a series of dependent claims. In this way, the general structure of a patent often resembles an inverted pyramid: the broadest claims are first, the narrowest last, and the scope of the claims generally "tapers" from the first to the last.

Here are a few examples of claims:

1. Element 95 .
2. A composition comprising a. a solid selected from the group consisting of i. sodium chloride, ii. potassium chloride and iii. lithium chloride;
b. a liquid selected from the group consisting of i. sulfuric acid, ii. nitric acid. . . .
3. The material wrought tungsten, having a specific gravity of approximately 19 or greater, and capable of being forged and worked.
4. A windmill comprising a wind-catching device, directed to face the oncoming wind force, said device turning a shaft, said shaft acting on gears or another device to change the direction of said wind force, so as to operate a pump that pumps water.
5. A windmill according to claim 4 wherein the force-changing device is a set of gears.
6. A method for treating baldness comprising applying to the scalp an aqueous solution of the compound minoxidil.
7. An apparatus for playing record albums comprising a cartridge or stylus made from at least 40 percent graphite by weight, a tone arm on which said cartridge or stylus is mounted, a turntable on which said record albums are placed for playing, and means for turning said turntable at appropriate speeds for the playing of said record albums.
Note that all the claims except claim 5 are examples of independent claims; they do not refer to any other claim or claims. This is in contrast to a dependent claim. You can tell that claim 5 is a dependent claim because it begins by referring to and incorporating a prior claim and adds one or more limitations or restrictions. A dependent claim incorporates all the limitations of the independent claim on which it depends.

Note also that claim 6 is a claim to a process or method rather than a device, and that the last element of claim 7 is stated in "means plus function" format: the element is not described in detail but is merely listed as "a means" for accomplishing some goal. The importance of this specialized claim format will be discussed in Chapter III(E)(4).

Following a preamble (such as "A composition"), patent claims use a transitional phrase to indicate how the claim limitations define the claim. The phrase "comprising" is an "open" transition: claims using this terminology cover devices that include all the listed elements plus any additional elements. The phrase "consisting of," by contrast, is closed: it does not cover devices that include additional elements. "Consisting essentially of" limits the scope of a claim to the specified materials or steps "and those that do not materially affect the basic and novel characteristic(s)" of the claimed invention. In re Herz, 537 F.2d 549, 551-52 (CCPA 1976) (emphasis in original).

A patent confers the right to exclude others from making, using, selling, offering for sale, or importing the claimed invention for 20 years from the filing of the patent application. Patent liability is a strict liability offense. And unlike trade secrets, independent invention is not a defense. Indeed, most patent suits are not against those who copied directly from the patentee. See Christopher A. Cotropia \& Mark A. Lemley, Copying in Patent Law, 87 N.C. L. Rev. 1421 (2009); cf. Robert P. Merges, Patent Infringement, Private Law, and Liability Standards, 76 U.C. L. J. 161, 230 (2024) (observing that "[i]lt can be exceedingly difficult to prove precisely how knowledge of a particular invention spreads or diffuses around a particular research community).

The exclusionary right is in a sense a negative right, for two reasons. First, a patent does not automatically grant an affirmative right to do anything; patented pharmaceuticals, for instance, must still pass regulatory review at the Food and Drug Administration to be sold legally. Second, a patented invention may itself be covered by a preexisting patent. For instance, a broad "pioneering" patent on a product or process may cover later-developed inventions, themselves patented as improvements. In such a case the holder of an improvement patent has the right to exclude everyone from her improvement-including the holder of the broad patent-while at the same time being barred from use of the improvement herself unless the holder of the broad patent authorizes such use. Patents so related are said to be "blocking patents."
