
The first regular administrative apparatus for granting patents-the first real patent "system"-arose during the Renaissance. The term patent-from the Latin patere (to be open), referring to an open letter of privilege from the sovereign-originated in this period. The Venetian Senate's 1474 Act established the first regularized patent system:

Be it enacted that, by the authority of this Council, every person who shall build any new and ingenious device in this City, not previously made in this Commonwealth, shall give notice of it to the office of our General Welfare Board when it has been reduced to perfection so that it can be used and operated. It being forbidden to every other person in any of our territories and towns to make any further device conforming with and similar to said one, without the consent and license of the author, for the term of 10 years. And if anybody builds it in violation hereof, the aforesaid author and inventor shall be entitled to have him summoned before any Magistrate of this City, by which Magistrate the said infringer shall be constrained to pay him one hundred ducats; and the device shall be destroyed at once.
Giulio Mandich, Venetian Patents (1450-1550), 30 J. Pat. \& Trademark Off. Soc'y 166, 177 (1948).

The Venetian Act lays out all the essential features of modern patent protection. It covers "devices"; states that they must be registered with a specific administrative agency; says that they must be "new and ingenious," "reduced to perfection," and "not previously made in this Commonwealth"; provides a fixed term of ten years; and sets forth a procedure to determine infringement, as well as a remedy.

The opening of trade in Europe ensured that the new Venetian concept would spread. As Italian craftsmen-particularly glassworkers-fanned out across Europe, they brought with them the idea of legal protection for inventions.

Patents came to Great Britain by this route in the middle of the sixteenth century. The chief minister under Elizabeth I, William Cecil (Lord Burghley), used patent grants to induce foreign artisans to introduce continental technologies into England. Thus, what later became the Anglo-American patent system originated as a mercantilist instrument-what today would be called a "strategic international trade" policy. The idea was to lure immigrants who had desirable skills and know-how with the promise of an exclusive privilege. Ironically, by the mid-cighteenth century, Britain began to show concern over the reverse problem-leakage of its technical prowess to overseas rivals, including the American colonies. See David Jeremy, Transatlantic INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION 36-49 (1981).

With the accession of James I in England in the early seventeenth century, patents became less an incentive for inventors of new arts and more a royal favor dispensed to well-placed courtiers. Under this rubric, "patents" were granted to such enterprises as running ale-houses. Parliament, whose members represented many trades injured by these special privileges, was displeased. Thus arose the Statute of Monopolies of 1624, which forbade all grants of exclusive privilege except those described in the famous Section 6:
[B]e it declared and enacted that any declaration before mentioned shall not extend to any letters patent and grants of privilege for the term of fourteen years or under, hereafter to be made, of the sole working or making of any manner of new manufactures within this realm, to the true and first inventor and inventors of such manufacture, which others at the time of making such letters patent shall not use, so as also they be not contrary to law, nor mischievous to the State, by raising prices of commodities at home, or hurt of trade, or generally inconvenient; the said fourteen years to be accounted from the date of the first letters patents, or grant of such privilege hereafter to be made. . . .
This statute called on the common law courts to review all privileges granted by the crown and outlawed all but those based on true inventions. The Statute of Monopolies, with its general ban on exclusive rights to manufacture and sell goods, and its limited exception for the purpose of fostering new inventions, is an early example of both antitrust laws and the complex economic interaction between a desire for competition and a desire for new inventions.

Patents were among the many British legal concepts introduced to the American colonies. State patents were granted in most of the original thirteen colonies, beginning with a Massachusetts patent in 1641. Even after the Revolution, under the Articles of Confederation, the individual states continued to issue patents.

Conflicts began to arise between the states-most notably over steamboat patents, which were issued to two different inventors during this period. With this problem (among others) in mind, the Constitutional Convention of 1789 resolved to create a national patent system rooted in the Constitution itself. Thus the provision of Article I, Section 8, Clause 8 authorizing Congress to award exclusive rights for a limited time to authors and inventors "for their respective writings and discoveries." The first U.S. patent statute was passed in 1790, in the very early days of the first Congress (reflecting the importance of this matter), and the first patent was issued shortly thereafter-to Samuel Hopkins of Pittsford, Vermont, for a process for making potash from wood ashes. Although there may be some limited scope for individual states to issue patents, for all intents and purposes patent law is and has been exclusively federal since 1790. See Camilla A. Hrdy, State Patent Laws in the Age of Laissez Faire, 28 Berkeley TECH. L.J. 45, 45 (2013); Camilla A. Hrdy, State Patents As A Solution to Underinvestment in Innovation, 62 U. KAN. L. REV. 487 (2013).

The story of Thomas Jefferson's involvement in the early national patent system has often been told. He was a significant contributor to the original statute, and he helped to administer the patent system established in 1790. See Edward C. Walterscheid, The Use and Abuse of History: The Supreme Court's Interpretation of Thomas Jefferson's Influence on the Patent Law, 39 IDEA 195 (1999); Adam Mossoff, Who Cares What Thomas Jefferson Thought about Patents? Reevaluating the Patent "Privilege" in Historical Context, 92 CORNELL L. REV. 953 (2007). Despite this, the strong federal flavor, as well as the emphasis on promotion of industrial technology, owes at least as much to the influence of Alexander Hamilton and other Federalist founders. See ALEXANDER HAMILTON, REPORT ON MANUFACTURERS (1791), reprinted in 3 ANNALS OF CONG. 971, 980-81 (Dec. 5, 1791), http://www.constitution.org/ ah/rpt_manufactures.pdf (emphasizing the value of promoting specialization in invention relating to machinery).

The nation's first patent act set forth terse general standards for protection, duration, rights, and remedies, but few details. This original institutional structure of the U.S. patent system was, however, short-lived for several reasons. It called upon the Secretary of State (Thomas Jefferson), the Secretary for the Department of War, and the Attorney General to examine patents, which, in light of their other responsibilities, proved untenable. Second, inventors were displeased with the high and vague threshold for protection: that inventions be deemed "sufficiently useful and important."

As a result, in 1793, Congress replaced the examination process with a registration system, leaving the evaluation of patentability entirely to the courts. The Patent Act of 1793 retained a terse standard for patentability: an inventor could patent "any new and useful art, machine, manufacture or composition of matter, or any new and useful improvement on any art, machine, manufacture or composition of matter, not known or used before the application." Patent Act of Feb. 21, 1793, ch. 11, ยง1, 1 Stat. 318. The inventor was still required to provide a written description of the invention and the manner of use "in such full, clear and exact terms, as to distinguish the same from all other things before known, and to enable any person skilled in the art or science, of which it is a branch, or with which it is most nearly connected, to make, compound, and use the same." See id., ยง3.

The courts fleshed out this lean statute. In the early years, they filled its gaps with English case law. See On the Patent Laws, 16 U.S. (3 Wheat.) App. 13-29 (1818) (Justice Joseph Story). In his first patent law opinion, Justice Story, sitting as a Circuit Justice, distinguished between unpatentable elements of motion and "the modus operandi, the peculiar device or manner of producing any given effect." The opinion recognized an experimental use defense based on the inference that "it could never have been the intention of the legislature to punish a man, who constructed such a machine merely for philosophical experiments, or for the purpose of ascertaining the sufficiency of the machine to produce its described effects." See Whittemore v. Cutter, 29 F.Cas. 1120, 1121-24 (C.C.D. Mass. 1813). In 1829, Justice Story interpreted the novelty requirement of "not known or used before the application" to pertain only to knowledge or use "by the public." See Pennock v. Dialogue, 27 U.S. 1, 19 (1829). The courts also established standards for disclosure, requiring that the patent document identify the patented invention with specificity and distinguish it from the prior art. See Lowell v. Lewis, 15 F. Cas. 1018, No. 8568 (C.C.D. Mass. 1817); Evans v. Eaton, 20 U.S. 356, 434-35 (1822).

While the patent system got on its feet under Jefferson and was fleshed out by jurists, it did not grow to its full stature until the 1836 revision, when a formal system of examination, with professional examiners, was substituted for the pro forma registration system of the 1793 Act. The lack of an examination system eroded faith in the patent system due to the proliferation of "unrestrained and promiscuous grants of patent privileges." See John Ruggles, Select Committee Report on the State and Condition of the Patent Office, S. Doc. No. 24-338, at 4 (1836). The Senate REPORT ACCOMPANYING THE PATENT ACT OF 1836 lamented that "[a] considerable portion of all the patents granted are worthless and void, as conflicting with, and infringing upon one another," the country had become "flooded with patent monopolies, embarrassing to bona fide patentees, whose rights are thus invaded on all sides," and that the "interference and collision of patents and privileges" had produced ruinous vexatious litigation. See Senate Report Accompanying Senate Bill No. 239, 24th Cong., 1st Sess. (April 28, 1836). At the same time, Congress recognized the importance of patent protection for the developing U.S. industrial economy.

Whoever imagines that, because so many inventions and so many improvements in machinery have been made, there remains little else to be discovered, has but a feeble conception of the infinitude and vastness of mechanical powers, or of the unlimited reach of science. Much as has been discovered, infinitely more remains unrevealed. The ingenuity of man is exploring a region without limits, and delving in a mine whose treasures are exhaustless. 'Neither are all the mysteries of nature unfolded, nor the mind tired in the pursuit of them.'
Id. The 1836 Act aimed to establish a reliable system of patent examination. It marked the transition from the early era of patents as "privileges" to the more modern conception of regularized, individual property rights or statutory grants. See OREN BRACHA, OWNING IDEAS: THE INTELLECTUAL ORIGINS OF AMERICAN INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 1790-1909, 208-09 (2016).

Since 1836 the patent system has grown dramatically by any standard-number of patents issued, number of cases litigated, or number of significant inventions patented. As greater demands were placed on it, the patent system developed new rules. For example, the requirement that an invention be more than novel, that it reveal an "inventive step," or what is now called nonobviousness, developed in the midnineteenth century to limit the number of patents that were being issued. Late in the nineteenth century the bureaucratic structure of the Patent Office as we know it began to take shape as well. See Robert P. Merges, American Patent Law: A Business AND ECONOMIC HISTORY Ch. 3, 4, 5 (2023) (describing how patents supported different business organizations over time, such as exclusive regional franchising, and later, inhouse research and development).

The patent system was a well-accepted feature of the economic landscape by the beginning of the twentieth century. Key patents on the light bulb, the telephone system, the basic design of the automobile, and the first airplanes symbolized the technical virtuosity and dynamism of the age. See B. ZORINA KHAN, THE DEMOCRATIZATION OF INVENTION (2009) (extensive history of U.S. patent law in the nineteenth century); CHRISTOPHER BEALCHAMP, INVENTED BY LAW: ALEXANDER GRAHAM BELL AND THE PATENT THAT CHANGED AMERICA (2015) (exploring the impact of the telephone patent wars on the formation of the Bell System in the U.S.). As the scale of industry grew, research and development departments began to appear in the larger companies. See Thomas P. Hughes, American Genesis: A Century of Invention and Technological Enthusiasm 1870-1970, 150-80 (1989); Catherine L. Fisk, Working Knowledge: Employee Innovation and the Rise of Corporate Intellectual Property, 1800-1930 (reissue ed., 2014). Patents were not only a valuable output of these departments; they helped measure the productivity of the departments and served to justify their importance.

The history of the U.S. patent system in the twentieth century reflects swings between greater and lesser protection. Following the trust-busting era at the turn of the century, some policymakers and jurists came to believe that large companies with patent portfolios were too powerful. Spurred in part by a series of anticompetitive acts by large companies whose patents dominated their respective industries, courts became less willing to enforce patent rights and more willing to punish patentees for exceeding the scope of their patent grant. Apart from the years of World War II, the Supreme Court for the most part placed strict limits on patent rights during the mid 20^th century. By the time the War was over, patent professionals converged on Congress in an effort to quietly undo some of the Supreme Court's patent-limiting campaign. The 1952 Patent Act, the first major revision of the patent code since the nineteenth century, marked a rejection of the most limiting elements of Supreme Court doctrine. It was in some ways a return to the principles of that century in many respects. See Robert P. Merges, One Hundred Years of Solicitude: Intellectual Property Law, 1900-2000, 88 CAL. L. REV. 2187 (2000).

Despite the new statute, the patent system in some ways reached a low-water mark during the 1960s and into the 1970s. See Robert P. Merges, American Patent Law: A Business and Economic History Ch. 6 (2023). This period found the American public losing some of its enthusiasm for new technologies-in part a response to the environmental pollution that was becoming so evident as a consequence of a century of industrialization. Patent law reflected the spirit of the time. It was difficult in this era to get a patent upheld in many federal circuit courts, and the circuits diverged widely both as to doctrine and basic attitudes toward patents. As a consequence, much of industry downplayed the significance of patents.

Things began to change in the late 1970s. The rising Japanese economy forced policymakers to notice that U.S. "competitiveness" lagged in many important industries.
especially autos and consumer electronics. After Ronald Reagan's election in 1980, both Congress and the Executive Branch prioritized reinvigoration of the U.S. R\&D system. Using an array of levers-ranging from tax policy to relaxed antitrust enforcement, university ownership of patents, and strengthening IP rights-the federal government moved to stimulate investment, invention and innovation.

In 1982 Congress passed the Federal Courts Improvement Act, creating the new Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit. See Rochelle Dreyfuss, The Federal Circuit: A Case Study in Specialized Courts, 64 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 1, 25-26 (1989). The Federal Circuit handles several important types of cases, but from the beginning one of its primary functions has been to hear all appeals involving patents. While the Federal Circuit was ostensibly formed strictly to unify patent doctrine, it was hoped by some (and expected by others) that the new court would make subtle alterations in the doctrinal fabric, with an eye toward expanding the scope of patent protection.

That is exactly what happened over the Federal Circuit's first two decades. See John R. Allison \& Mark A. Lemley, Empirical Evidence on the Validity of Litigated Patents, 26 Am. Intell. Prop. L. Ass'n Q.J. 185 (1998). The Federal Circuit expanded the scope of patentable subject matter (until the Supreme Court stepped in to narrow it again) and strengthened patent rights across many dimensions. The Federal Circuit's emergence paralleled a number of related developments that heightened interest in patents and thus in the work of the new court. Exciting new industries such as biotechnology, digital networks, high-capacity computers, and "green technologies" (fucl conservation, alternative energy, etc.) brought their patents before the court. Patents were found valid more often as compared to the days just preceding the Federal Circuit. Damage awards increased, moving patents into visibility at higher levels of many companies. Venture capitalists showed interest in some cases in patent protection as a prerequisite to startup financing. One result of this greater interest and stronger protection was a proliferation of low-quality business method and software patents in the late 1990s and early 2000 period. That in turn fully awakened the Supreme Court, which has issued numerous influential decisions since 2006 tightening patent standards and generally weakening patent protection. The Federal Circuit has followed suit, narrowing patent protection in the past several years. And Congress passed the America Invents Act in 2011, adding Patent Office administrative patent challenges to the landscape of U.S. patent law. Nonetheless, the growth of the patent system continues apace, with record numbers of patent applications and patent grants. See Mark A. Lemley, The Surprising Resilience of the Patent System, 95 Tex. L. Rev. 1 (2016). The emergence of generative AI technology begins a new chapter in the patent story.
