
Restatement (Third) of Agency §§1.01,7.07
Restatement of Employment Law §1.01
The employment relationship is a paradigmatic agency relationship, with an employer being the principal and the employee being an agent. In most circumstances, the law of agency does not distinguish between the duties owed by an employee-agent and a nonemployee-agent (usually called an "independent contractor"). However, for more than a century, social welfare legislation and related taxation regimes have made this distinction crucial for business planners. For example, an employer is subject to minimum wage laws, Social Security taxation, and contributions to unemployment insurance funds for each of its employees. A firm is subject to none of these costs for independent contractors. Instead, independent contractors must assume the full burden of planning for how to survive unemployment, or sub-minimum-wage compensation, as well as a higher Social Security tax burden than employees face.

Under the Restatements of Agency, whether one is an employee or an independent contractor is tested primarily by reference to the extent of control exercised by the alleged principal or alleged employer. This is the focus the court applied in Jenson Farms v. Cargill, in Part C. 2 of this chapter.

In the Restatement of Employment Law (2015), the focus largely remains on the alleged employer's control over the actions of an alleged employee, but the terminology and factors emphasized recognize the centrality of the alleged employee's entrepreneurial control and ability to pursue self-interest as an independent businessperson.

The following case explores the contours of the employee-agent versus non-employee-agent determination against the backdrop of the growing importance of "gig" workers and short-term employment, often part-time, often for more than one "employer, and often contracted over social media without any human interaction.

# In the Matter of Vega 

Court of Appeals of New York, 2020
35 N.Y. 3 d 131
Chief Judge DiFiore.
The issue before us is whether the decision of the Unemployment Insurance Appeals Board (the Board) that claimant, a former Postmates, Inc. courier, and others similarly-situated are employees for whom Postmates is required to make contributions to the unemployment insurance fund was supported by substantial evidence. Because there was record support for the Board's finding that the couriers were employees, we reverse the Appellate Division order and reinstate the Board's decision. . . .

Postmates is a delivery business that uses a website and smartphone application to dispatch couriers to pick-up and deliver goods from local restaurants and stores to customers in cities across the United States-deliveries that are, for the most part, completed within an hour. Postmates solicits and hires its couriers, who undergo background checks before being approved to work by Postmates. Once they are approved, the couriers decide when to log into the application and which delivery jobs to accept. Once a courier accepts a delivery job made available through the application, the courier receives additional information about the job from Postmates, including the destination for the delivery. After completing a job, Postmates pays the couriers 80% of the delivery fees charged to customers, and payments are made by the customer directly to Postmates, which pays its couriers even when the fees are not collected from customers. Couriers' pay and the delivery fee are both nonnegotiable.
Claimant Luis Vega worked as a Postmates courier in June 2015. Based on negative reviews from customers alleging fraudulent activity, Postmates blocked claimant from using the application. Thereafter, claimant filed for unemployment benefits. . . .

As relevant here, under the Labor Law, "employment" is broadly defined as "any service under any contract of employment for hire, express or implied, written, or oral" (Labor Law § 511[1][a]). Traditionally, the Board considers a number of factors in determining whether a worker is an employee or an independent contractor, examining "[a]ll aspects of the arrangement". But the touchstone of the analysis is whether the employer exercised control over the results produced by the worker or the means used to achieve the results. The doctrine is necessarily flexible because no enumerated list of factors can apply to every situation faced by a worker, and the relevant indicia of control will necessarily vary depending on the nature of the work.

Here, there is substantial evidence in the record to support the Board's determination that Postmates exercised control over its couriers sufficient to render them employees rather than independent contractors operating their own businesses. The company is operated through Postmates' digital platform, accessed via smartphone app, which connects customers to Postmates couriers, without whom the company could not operate. While couriers decide when to log into the Postmates' app and accept delivery jobs, the company controls the assignment of deliveries by determining which couriers have access to possible delivery jobs. Postmates informs couriers where requested goods are to be delivered only after a courier has accepted the assignment. Customers cannot request that the job be performed by a particular worker. In the event a courier becomes unavailable after accepting a job, Postmates - not the courier - finds a replacement. Although Postmates does not dictate the exact routes couriers must take between the pick-up and delivery locations, the company tracks courier location during deliveries in real time on the omnipresent app, providing customers an estimated time of arrival for their deliveries. The couriers' compensation, which the company unilaterally fixes and the couriers have no ability to negotiate, are [sic] paid to the couriers by Postmates. Postmates, not its couriers, bears the loss when customers do not pay. Because the total fee charged by Postmates is based solely on the distance of the delivery and couriers are not given that information in advance, they are unable to determine their share until after accepting a job. Further, Postmates unilaterally sets the delivery fees, for which it bills the customers directly through the app. Couriers receive a company sponsored "PEX" card which they may use to purchase the customers' requested items, when necessary. Postmates handles all customer complaints and, in some circumstances, retains liability to the customer for incorrect or damaged deliveries.

Postmates exercises more than "incidental control" over its couriers-low-paid workers performing unskilled labor who possess limited discretion over how to do their jobs. That the couriers retain some independence to choose their work schedule and delivery route does not mean that they have actual control over their work or the service Postmates provides its customers; indeed, there is substantial evidence for the Board's conclusion that Postmates dominates the significant aspects of its couriers' work by dictating to which customers they can deliver, where to deliver the requested items, effectively limiting the time frame for delivery and controlling all aspects of pricing and payment.
Although the operative technology has changed in the interim decades, this case is indistinguishable from Matter of Rivera, where we held that substantial evidence supported the Board's conclusion that a similar delivery person was an employee of the delivery company - even though he set his own delivery routes and did not have a set work schedule but called the company's dispatcher whenever he wished to engage in work, accepting only the jobs he desired (see Matter of Rivera, 504 N.E. 2 d 381 [1986], cert denied 481 U.S. 1049 [1987]. The dissent's attempt to distinguish Matter of Rivera, as well as its efforts to shoehorn the facts here into our precedent involving distinct industries and work conditions, is unavailing.

Matter of Yoga Vida NYC, Inc., where this Court held that the Board's determination that certain yoga instructors were employees was not supported by substantial evidence, does not dictate a different result (see 28 N.Y.3d 1013, 41 N.Y.S.3d 456, 64 N.E.3d 276 [2016]). That decision did not change the substantial evidence standard that applies to judicial review of the Board's determinations; instead, it explicitly reaffirmed that standard. Further, as already stated, the importance of different indicia of control will vary depending on the nature of the work, and yoga instructors are not couriers. A yoga instructor provides a service that is, in some respects, unique to that instructor and his or her personal characteristics, and that was significant in Matter of Yoga Vida where the non-staff instructors were free to create their own customer following and invite students to attend their classes at competing studios. Moreover, Yoga Vida's nonstaff instructors were paid only if a certain number of students attended their class and, therefore, needed to ensure some degree of a customer following to be successful. They also chose the method by which Yoga Vida would calculate their pay (either hourly or on a percentage basis). In these ways, the non-staff yoga instructors, in contrast to the other staff instructors, operated as independent contractors who were in business for themselves. The same cannot be said of the couriers here. Customers cannot choose, nor do they have reason to choose, a particular individual to perform the delivery and thus, unlike the non-staff instructors in Matter of Yoga Vida, Postmates' couriers do not have the ability to create a following or generate their own customer base. ^5 Instead, Postmates has complete control over the means by which it obtains customers, how the customer is connected to the delivery person, and whether and how its couriers are compensated. Therefore, there is record support for the Board's conclusion that Postmates exercised more than incidental control over the couriers. "There being substantial evidence to sustain the determinations, the judicial inquiry is complete". . . .

Accordingly, the order of the Appellate Division should be reversed, with costs, and the decision of the Board reinstated.

Rivera, J. (concurring in result).
According to Postmates, Inc., its "couriers" - persons who make up the company's delivery staff, like claimant Luis Vega - are independent contractors because they exercise a modicum of choice in how to conduct their work. Even a cursory look at Postmates's structure reveals the fallacy of this argument. Postmates has adopted an atomized business model which prevents these workers from providing delivery services as independent business owners. During their employ, "couriers" have no meaningful way to commodify their efforts into a self-sustaining business. The structure of their work and the realities of the service economy do not permit them to develop a client base by exercising control over their business choices. To put it bluntly, Postmates did not hire entrepreneurs as delivery persons, and Postmates' attempt to create the illusion of entrepreneurialism does not transform these employees into a fleet of independent contractors.

The majority correctly describes our multi-factor test for determining whether a worker is an employee, and reasonably considers the Board's application of the relevant factors here. Nevertheless, while the test is well-suited to most cases, it has its limits and may prove difficult to apply to electronically mediated work arrangements. I would adopt as the better approach the Restatement of Employment Law's test for determining employee status, which alternatively considers the worker's entrepreneurial control over their services and the extent to which the employer "effectively prevents" such worker control (see Restatement of Employment Law § 1.01). Therefore, I write to clarify how the Restatement of Employment Law test applies to Postmates and similar business models. . . .

# B. THE MULTIFACTOR TEST FOR DETERMINING AN EMPLOYMENT RELATIONSHIP 

Under our precedent, the existence of an employer-employee relationship is measured under a multifactor test to determine the control exercised by the employer over the results produced and the means by which services are rendered, leading to the distinction between employee and independent contractor . . . . The employer control test has its foundation in torts and the unfortunately labeled "master-servant" relationship . . . . The factors applied in our case law and the Board's decisions are summarized in the Restatement (First) of the Law of Agency § 220, which this Court cited approvingly in Matter of Morton, 284 N.Y. 167, 173, 30 N.E.2d 369 [1940] ["the degree of control which must be reserved by the employer in order to create the employer-employee relationship cannot be stated in terms of mathematical precision, and various aspects of the relationship may be considered in arriving at the conclusion in a particular case"], citing Restatement [First] of Agency § 220). . . .

Since Morton, the American Law Institute has issued the Second and Third Restatements of Agency. Both retain the common law right to control test. The Restatement (Third), issued in 2006, consolidated various sections of the previous iterations, including section 220 , into a new section 7.07 , which retains the employer right to control test and recognizes the same factors listed in the Restatement (First) and (Second), as well as the employer's control of the details of the employee's work (Restatement [Third] of Agency § 7.07, Comment f ). Both of the newer Restatements of Agency also explain that the employer's right to control may be attenuated, and the Restatement (Third) emphasizes that "all employers retain a right of control, however infrequently exercised" (see id.). . . .
# C. RESTATEMENT OF EMPLOYMENT LAW 

The Restatement of Employment Law, issued in 2015, distinguishes between an employee and an independent businessperson. Under section 1.01, titled Conditions for Existence of Employment Relationship, this Restatement explains that, when the worker and employer agree that the worker will provide services for the employer, the worker is an employee if "the employer controls the manner and means by which the individual renders services, or the employer otherwise effectively prevents the individual from rendering those services as an independent businessperson" (Restatement of Employment Law § 1.01[a]). The analysis draws from the commonlaw right of control test described in the Restatements of Agency, but recognizes the test "looks not only to the principal's control of the physical details of how the service provider performs the service, but also to the principal's control of other aspects of the service provider's performance that determines whether [they are] able to provide those services as an independent businessperson" (id. Comment e). Like our Court in Concourse Ophthalmology (see 60 N.Y. 2 d at 736, 469 N.Y.S. 2~d78,456 N.E. 2 d 1201), the Restatement recognizes that some workers' roles may not be susceptible to "close employer supervision," but nevertheless they should be treated as employees (id. Comment d ).

The Restatement further describes an "independent businessperson" as a worker who "in [their] own interest exercises entrepreneurial control over important business decisions, including whether to hire and where to assign assistants, whether to purchase and where to deploy equipment, and whether and when to provide service to other customers" (id. § 1.01[b]). It further explains the distinction:


#### Abstract

"Under this test, employees are service providers who, because of the employer's control over their performance, do not provide their services to the employer as independent businesspersons. In many cases, the employer exercises a degree of control over the physical details of how the services are performed that denies the service providers any ability to make entrepreneurial decisions. In other cases, even when the employer does not closely supervise the service providers, the employer's control of such matters as the scheduling of performance, the use of equipment, and the hiring of assistants effectively prevents the service providers from making entrepreneurial decisions in their own economic interest. By contrast, service providers who do have entrepreneurial control over business decisions can seek to increase their personal economic returns not simply by working harder in performing the service for the principal but also by working at their discretion for other customers, by hiring assistants and by deploying or substituting for labor their own equipment or capital. Those independent businessperson-service providers are in a different economic position from employ-ce-service providers who do not have such entrepreneurial control. On that ground, the latter service providers have been treated differently by the employment laws" (id. Comment e ).


Workers who are prevented by their employers from acting as independent businesspersons "are employees" under the second prong of the Restatement test, "regardless of the manner of their compensation or the flexibility of their work hours" (id.).

With respect to worker entrepreneurialism, Comment f further explains:

is performed, or the employee's skills in performing the work. When that is true, the question of the service provider's employee status turns on whether the employer's control over the service provider's performance effectively prevents the service provider from providing the services as an independent businessperson.
"As set forth in §1.01 (a) (3) and §1.01 (b), individuals provide services as independent businesspersons if they are able to serve their own economic interests through entrepreneurial control over a significant part of their costs or opportunities for profit. Such entrepreneurial control is control over important business decisions, such as the hiring and assignment of assistants, the purchase and use of equipment, and whether and when to serve other customers. Employeeservice providers, by contrast, can affect their remuneration or other economic interest only by working harder or more skillfully on their employer's behalf; they are not entrepreneurs operating as independent businesspersons.
"Under the foregoing test, highly skilled or highly trained professionals are employees if the employer controls the cost of providing, and the timing of, their work; such individuals can seek to improve their economic returns only by providing the employer more or better services. The same is also true of executives who are subject only to the general control of a corporation's board of directors but who are expected to exercise their discretion solely to further the corporation's business objectives and not any independent business objectives of their own" (id. Comment f ).

Notably, the Reporter's Notes to the Restatement of Employment Law highlight two important considerations relevant to a worker's exercise of entrepreneurial control. First, "[u]nskilled workers who provide no additional input other than their own labor ordinarily will not be held to be providing services as independent businesspersons even when the employer does not control the physical details of their work performance" Second, " [t] he requirement that the employment relationship effectively prevent the employee from rendering services as part of an independent business ties the entrepreneurial-control test to the right-to-control test. It is the actual relationship with the recipient of the services that is determinative. In order for a service provider to be operating an independent business, therefore, that relationship must not preclude the provider from exercising entrepreneurial control in [the worker's] own interest. If the actual relationship has not changed, it should not be relevant that an employer has given an employee an opportunity to modify an employment relationship and become an independent business operator" (id.). . . .

At the intersection of these principles are concepts of worker autonomy, employer control over work, individual business development by a worker in furtherance of self-interest, and the effects of worker exploitation on society and the economy. Given our legislature's recognition that "[e]conomic insecurity due to unemployment is a serious menace to the health, welfare, and morale of the people of this state," and the Unemployment Insurance Law's remedial purpose to provide benefits to workers who become unemployed through no fault of their own, a determination about who is eligible for remuneration from the insurance fund should be informed by the realities of the worker's experience. We should not equate independent contractor status with illusory opportunities for worker entrepreneurialism.

The fact that an employer profits from unskilled labor without having to supervise a worker in the traditional sense does not render the worker an independent contractor merely by dearth of oversight. An illusory opportunity to be your own businessperson is insufficient to establish independent contractor status where the employer controls significant aspects of the work that meaningfully impact the employer-employee relationship, and by so doing, "effectively prevents the individual from rendering those services as an independent businessperson" (Restatement of Employment Law § 1.01[a][3]). The conditions establishing an employment relationship set forth in the Restatement of Employment Law, drawing in part from the multifactor test of the Restatement (Third) of Agency, should be applied to unemployment insurance cases.

# II. Postmates's Business Model 

Postmates describes itself as "a company that created and operates a web-based and mobile Platform" which "facilitates a marketplace of deliveries from local businesses through a network of freelance Delivery Providers." Notwithstanding this attempt to distinguish itself from other delivery services, the record makes clear that Postmates is in the business of making timely deliveries and uses technology to atomize this service. Postmates does not "match" an individual who can then negotiate in their own interests the best way to meet a client's needs. Postmates' "marketplace" is illusory as Postmates' business model depends on unskilled workers who have no ability to work as independent delivery persons and develop a client base while in Postmates' employ.

To be precise, Postmates created an algorithm that permits an individual to place an online delivery order. The request is made on the Platform and then Postmates finds a person from its pool of hired workers to make the delivery. Delivery persons - called "couriers" - access delivery assignments through the Platform, i.e., the Postmates app. Postmates does a criminal background check on couriers and trains them on how to use the app. Couriers must sign an "Independent Contractor Acknowledgement Agreement." Although couriers may use their preferred means of transportation to conduct their deliveries, they must give Postmates advance notice of their choice. Couriers log into the app at will, and may accept or decline a posted delivery assignment, but they do not receive details about the nature of the assignment in advance of acceptance. Postmates retains the right to unilaterally terminate couriers without notice, such as for poor customer ratings or other poor performance. As I discuss below, Postmates' business model depends on a delivery staff of "couriers" who are employees, not independent contractors.

## III. Restatement of Employment Law Applied to Postmates

"Couriers" do not have an exclusive employment contract with Postmates, but being able to work simultaneously for another employer does not make a courier an independent businessperson. Couriers cannot build a client-base through their business savvy; apart from the moment of delivery, customer contact is through Postmates, and customers do not choose a delivery person. Nor does the work lend itself to the "exercise[ ] of entrepreneurial control over important business decisions" (Restatement of Employment Law § 1.01[b]). Indeed, the model depends on a courier not providing the same services as an independent businessperson.
To illustrate the point, we need only consider what the parties present as a typical Postmates delivery assignment: the request to pick up a burrito bowl from a store and deliver it to the customer's home. Postmates informs couriers of the pickup location for this delivery request through the app, and once a courier accepts the assignment, Postmates forwards the details. The courier is then tracked by both Postmates and the customer. At no time during the course of this delivery does the courier make important business decisions that would serve his entrepreneurial interests. The point is to get the delivery done and get paid by Postmates. There is no value in an independent relationship with any one customer since it will not lead to economically beneficial future business. You simply cannot individually deliver enough of those types of orders to make a business out of it. . . .

The fact is that Postmates benefits from the labor of unskilled workers and persons of low income-both vulnerable to employer exploitation, as well as misclassification under the statute. . . . Although the Unemployment Insurance Law was passed decades before the digital age, today's app-enabled gig worker is subject to the same devastating financial "insecurity" faced by prior generations of unemployed wage earners and which initially motivated legislators to act. . . .

Wilson, J. (dissenting).
The majority's opinion suffers from two independent defects. The first is a failure to examine the record to determine whether the findings of the Commissioner of Labor were supported by substantial evidence. Many of those findings were so lacking in support as to appear to have been cut and pasted from the decision in some other matter, or from a form list of all the possible factors that might warrant the conclusion that someone was an employee. Under those circumstances, reversal is required. The second is a failure to recognize that the realities of the contemporary working world have outpaced our jurisprudence. . . .

# I. . . . 

Anyone can download the Postmates Fleet app to become a courier for Postmates. I could be a Postmates courier, so long as I passed a criminal background check. I could make Postmates deliveries when and where I pleased, and extemporaneously indicate my availability at moments when I need a break from the press of court business. I could make my deliveries by any form of locomotion I choose: walk, bicycle, scooter, car, rollerblade, etc.

Luis Vega, at least briefly, thought more of the Postmates opportunity than did I. He downloaded the app, provided sufficient information to pass the criminal check, and was thereafter authorized to use the Postmates service to make deliveries. Mr. Vega indicated he would be walking to make deliveries. He first logged on to Postmates on June 8, 2015, and last logged on to Postmates on June 15, 2015. At that point, he had worked for Postmates for less than a week and had logged on 12 times for an average of 3 hours and 15 minutes at a time. During those six days, Mr. Vega rejected or ignored about 50% of the assignments offered to him. The record was unequivocal that, even if Mr. Vega requested to make a specific delivery assignment and obtained it, he could thereafter change his mind and reject it, causing it to be dumped back into the pool of assignments available to others. Mr. Vega had no set schedule; he had no supervisor; and, he chose what deliveries interested him, how to perform deliveries, the route he would take, and the times at which he would log on and off. Of the jobs he accepted over those six days, "a lot of requesters' feedback" indicated that "they weren't receiving the items requested." Postmates therefore blocked Mr. Vega from the app. Mr. Vega then filed for unemployment benefits. . . .

In its determination of the matter in August 2015, the Department of Labor classified Mr. Vega as an employee for the purposes of New York Unemployment Insurance Law. The Department of Labor's determination that Mr. Vega was Postmates' employee lists 24 factors supporting that determination. A large number of those factual findings are directly contradicted by the record. Among those factors are: Mr. Vega was told "when, where, and how the work was to be performed"; he was required to report to a supervisor and work an established schedule; he was required to deliver the packages within a set time; his work would be reviewed; he could not take time off without Postmates' approval; he was covered by a workers' compensation policy; he was not free to determine the route of the delivery; and, he could not perform other deliveries while on route with Postmates.

None of these factors has support in the record. Each of those factors was undermined by the testimony before the ALJ, who found that the Postmates couriers chose when they worked, how they worked, and where they worked; couriers could and did choose their own routes; Mr. Vega was not covered by workers' compensation; couriers were free to reject, ignore, or accept assignments as they chose; and, couriers were free to work for other companies at the same time as they worked for Postmates. Although the Commissioner found that Mr. Vega "could not engage substitutes or other couriers without your permission," the record evidence was that Mr. Vega could "hand his phone to a complete stranger" to complete deliveries. . . .

Based on the record, which included both exhibits and testimony, the ALJ held that Mr. Vega was an independent contractor not entitled to unemployment benefits. . . . To recap: the Commissioner, the Board and majority conclude that Mr. Vega's slapdash week of activity made him Postmates' employee; the ALJ and Third Department concluded, as do I, that it did not. What accounts for that disagreement? The failure of our precedent to keep up with the times. . . .

# B. 

Our inconsistent, summary precedent makes it nearly impossible to arrive at a decision in this case that seems in perfect harmony with what has come before. Reading today's decision, one might think that, in the future, the Board's employment-status determinations will unfailingly be affirmed on the grounds of substantial evidence. Instead, today's decision is just one more bounce of the ball in the opposite direction whence it came.

In 12 Cornelia St., 56 N.Y.2d 895, 453 N.Y.S.2d 402, 438 N.E.2d 1117 (1982), a memorandum opinion, we held that the Unemployment Insurance Appeal Board's determination that real estate salespersons were employees was not supported by substantial evidence, because that "determination must rest on evidence that the company exercises control over the results produced by its salespersons or the means used to achieve the results" - and "such control [wa]s lacking" where the salespersons: (1) were paid commissions; (2) worked whatever hours they chose; (3) were free to engage in outside employment; (4) bore their own expenses; (5) were not required to attend meetings or trainings; (6) paid their own premiums for health insurance; and, (7) found their own leads. Those salespeople were independent contractors even though the real estate corporation supplied them with business cards, held regular sales meetings, and provided them with workers' compensation. Mr. Vega-like the salespeople-was paid by commission (he received a percentage of the fee charged to the customer by Postmates for each delivery, which fee varied by distance), worked whatever hours he chose, was free to engage in outside employment, bore his own expenses, was provided no health insurance, and was not required to attend meetings or trainings (other than one initial meeting on how to use the app). Yet, despite the "evidence in the record that would have supported a contrary conclusion", in 12 Cornelia St., we reversed the Board's determination as not supported by substantial evidence. . .

Our most recent decision in this area, also a memorandum, is Yoga Vida. There, as here, the Department of Labor initially determined Yoga Vida was liable for unemployment insurance for its non-staff yoga instructors; as here, an ALJ overruled that determination; next, the Unemployment Insurance Appeal Board reversed the ALJ's decision, sustaining the Department's initial determination (Yoga Vida, 28 N.Y.3d at 1015, 41 N.Y.S.3d 456, 64 N.E.3d 276). The Appellate Division sustained the Board's determination that the non-staff yoga instructors were employees. We reversed, holding the Board's determination was not supported by substantial evidence because the non-staff instructors made their own schedules, were paid only if students attended their classes, could work for competitors, and were not required to attend meetings or trainings. Each of those factors-which are the factors that justified our reversal as a matter of law-is true as to Mr. Vega: Mr. Vega made his own schedule, was paid only for deliveries he made, could work and perform deliveries for other companies even while making deliveries for Postmates, and was not required to attend meetings or trainings. Moreover, Mr. Vega did not have to work on a prearranged schedule; the non-staff instructors did. Mr. Vega did not have to work at his employer's place of business; the non-staff instructors did. In Yoga Vida, we emphasized that Yoga Vida's determination and collection of the fees that the non-staff instructors received did "not supply sufficient indicia of control"). So too, Postmates' control over the fees Mr. Vega received should be insufficient to support an employer-employee relationship. That the outcome today is the diametric opposite of the outcome arrived at just three years ago in Yoga Vida, an outcome that the majority contends was reached by the same standard as applied here, shows just how inconstant our "test" has become.

The facts surrounding Mr. Vega's six-day adventure as a courier neatly fit into the exertion of mere "incidental control," which does not provide substantial evidence for a Board's determination of employee status. Mr. Vega retained more than just "some independence to choose [his] work schedule and delivery route" - he had complete control over his schedule, the hours he logged on, the jobs he accepted or rejected (or rejected even after accepting them), and the routes he took when, having accepted a job, he actually made the promised delivery. Nor does Mr. Vega need to have actual control over "the service Postmates provides its customers", for that is not the test. The control test applies only to the company's control over the worker's labor; the worker need not have control over, or anything to do with, the service provided by the company. Our precedent may not be consistent, and it certainly makes it difficult for litigants and lower courts to apply the control test, but at least it provides this answer: Mr. Vega is far more an "independent contractor" than the real estate salespeople given business cards by their company in 12 Cornelia St., the product promoter who was told what to wear and how to present in Hertz, or the yoga instructors told when, where and what to teach in Yoga Vida.

# III. 

The overarching problem in our control test jurisprudence is exemplified by Mr. Vega's case. . . .

Without regular examination, modification and explication of our common law, common-law tests risk falling into incoherence or vagueness. . . .

We need a clear understanding, comprehending the modern realities of our rapidly evolving economy, of who should be an employee and who an independent contractor, including whether work relationships should continue to be measured on that dichotomy. It is past time for the law to reexamine the definition of work and its application to different forms of entitlement and obligation. Our current framework, as inconsistently applied, fails to provide clarity to anyone involved. The agencies tasked with applying our cases and the courts that attempt to review those decisions for substantial evidence oscillate in result and rationale. The common-law test for status as an employee developed in a vastly different time, when employment was monotonic. Now, it is cacophonic. The number of workers performing multiple or alternative jobs has grown dramatically. New technology and the rise of the sharing economy have driven further changes, including the crowdsourcing of flexible and low-barrier-to-entry jobs upon which many workers are less reliant than our traditional notion of career employees. The challenge is how to apply our inconsistent commonlaw test in a world where work looks much different than it did when that test was developed and where we cannot, if we hold true to the deferential standard of review, reverse an agency determination so long as it has relied on some of the factors we have identified as relevant.

The stakes are high. As the California Supreme Court, confronting a similar question, phrased the matter (Dynamex Operations W. v. Superior Ct., 416 P.3d 1 [2018]):

may be required under applicable laws to assume additional financial burdens with respect to such workers and their families."
"Although in some circumstances classification as an independent contractor may be advantageous to workers as well as to businesses, the risk that workers who should be treated as employees may be improperly misclassified as independent contractors is significant in light of the potentially substantial economic incentives that a business may have in mischaracterizing some workers as independent contractors. Such incentives include the unfair competitive advantage the business may obtain over competitors that properly classify similar workers as employees and that thereby assume the fiscal and other responsibilities and burdens that an employer owes to its employees. In recent years, the relevant regulatory agencies of both the federal and state governments have declared that the misclassification of workers as independent contractors rather than employees is a very serious problem, depriving federal and state governments of billions of dollars in tax revenue and millions of workers of the labor law protections to which they are entitled."

Although it is well within the purview of the courts to alter a common-law test, that is best done incrementally; the complete overhaul of our common-law employment test to adapt it to the present and future economy is not a task to which courts are well suited. . . . Nevertheless, until the legislature steps in, we have an obligation to do our best to reach consistent results so that both businesses and workers can structure their affairs with a sound understanding of when the benefits and obligations of "employment" are imposed or conferred upon them. Whether other Postmates couriers are employees is not before us. Mr. Vega's case is, and he is not.

# NOTES AND QUESTIONS 

1. Under the law of agency, a person can agree to be an unpaid or gratuitous agent. This is not uncommon, as Comment c to the Restatement (Third) of Agency §1.04 notes:

Gratuitous agency is a common occurrence. Holders of powers of attorney on behalf of friends or family members typically do not expect or receive compensation for acting as agents. Additionally, agency relationships may arise casually, often when one person agrees to do some service for another that will affect the other's legal position.

But what if an agent and an employer have different expectations about the gratuitous nature of the relationship? As in the independent contractor setting, federal and state fair labor laws come into play if an agent asserts that she should be compensated for her work, and the employer in question asserts that she agreed to an unpaid agency relationship. How should such disagreements be sorted out?
2. Neither the Restatements of Agency nor the Restatement of Employment Law provides specific guidance as to when an unpaid agent should be characterized as an employee for purposes of social legislation such as the federal Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA). Under the Restatement (Third) of Agency § 1.04(3) "a gratuitous agent acts without a right to compensation." And under the Restatement of Employment Law § 1.02 "[a]n individual is a volunteer and not an employee if the individual renders uncoerced services to a principal without being offered a material inducement." Can you come up with the relevant factors to consider in applying these definitions?
3. Consider the approach of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in a case involving unpaid interns, a setting that is frequently subject to misunderstandings by both the intern and employer:
[W]e agree with defendants that the proper question is whether the intern or the employer is the primary beneficiary of the relationship. The primary beneficiary test has three salient features. First, it focuses on what the intern receives in exchange for his work. Second, it also accords courts the flexibility to examine the economic reality as it exists between the intern and the employer. Third, it acknowledges that the intern-employer relationship should not be analyzed in the same manner as the standard employer-employee relationship because the intern enters into the relationship with the expectation of receiving educational or vocational benefits that are not necessarily expected with all forms of employment (though such benefits may be a product of experience on the job)....

In somewhat analogous contexts, we have articulated a set of non-exhaustive factors to aid courts in determining whether a worker is an employee for purposes of the FLSA. In the context of unpaid internships, we think a non-exhaustive set of considerations should include:

1. The extent to which the intern and the employer clearly understand that there is no expectation of compensation. Any promise of compensation, express or implied, suggests that the intern is an employee-and vice versa.
2. The extent to which the internship provides training that would be similar to that which would be given in an educational environment, including the clinical and other hands-on training provided by educational institutions.
3. The extent to which the internship is tied to the intern's formal education program by integrated coursework or the receipt of academic credit.
4. The extent to which the internship accommodates the intern's academic commitments by corresponding to the academic calendar.
5. The extent to which the internship's duration is limited to the period in which the internship provides the intern with beneficial learning.
6. The extent to which the intern's work complements, rather than displaces, the work of paid employees while providing significant educational benefits to the intern.
7. The extent to which the intern and the employer understand that the internship is conducted without entitlement to a paid job at the conclusion of the internship.

Applying these considerations requires weighing and balancing all of the circumstances. No one factor is dispositive and every factor need not point in the same direction for the court to conclude that the intern is not an employee entitled to the minimum wage. In addition, the factors we specify are non-exhaustive-courts may consider relevant evidence beyond the specified factors in appropriate cases. And because the touchstone of this analysis is the "economic reality" of the relationship, a court may elect in certain cases, including cases that can proceed as collective actions, to consider evidence about an internship program as a whole rather than the experience of a specific intern.

Glatt v. Fox Searchlight Pictures, Inc., 811 F.3d 528, 536-537 (2d Cir. 2016).
4. Another controversial setting involves the application of wage and hour laws to student athletes. Unlike the intern setting, a threshold question to be answered is whether and in what circumstance student athletes should be characterized as engaged in work primarily for the benefit of the school sponsoring the activity in question, as opposed to engaged in play primarily for the benefit of the athletes themselves.
In looking to "the economic realities of the relationship" between college athletes and their schools or the NCAA, we begin by noting that athletes in the collegiate context are sui generis. After all, merely playing sports, even at the college level, cannot always be considered commercial work integral to the employer's business in the same way that the activities performed by independent contractors or interns are assumed to be in previously mentioned multifactor tests. The Supreme Court has acknowledged this possibility, explaining that the FLSA does not cover a person who, "without promise or expectation of compensation, but solely for his personal purpose or pleasure" performs "activities carried on by other persons either for their pleasure or profit." Walling, 330 U.S. at 152, 67 S.Ct. 639. The Department of Labor (DOL) makes the same distinction. But just as intuitively, with professional athletes as the clearest indicators, playing sports can certainly constitute compensable work. Any test to determine college athlete employee status under the FLSA must therefore be able to identify athletes whose play is also work.

Johnson v. Nat'l Collegiate Athletic Ass'n, 108 F.4th 163, 177-178 (3d Cir. 2024).


[^0]: 5. Although the dissent asserts otherwise, yoga instructors' interest in creating and maintaining their own customer followings is nothing like customers' online ratings of their Postmates couriers. Postmates customers have no ability to choose their courier when placing a delivery request. Further, there is no evidence in the record that Postmates' couriers can determine the compensation they will receive from a delivery job before accepting it.
[^0]: "Under §1.01(a)(3), the employer's close supervision of the physical details of how the service provider performs the services is sufficient, but not necessary, for employee status. As a practical matter, an employer might not need to monitor closely the details of the work performed by an employee-service provider because of the nature of the work periormed, the place where it
[^0]: "On the one hand, if a worker should properly be classified as an employee, the hiring business bears the responsibility of paying federal Social Security and payroll taxes, unemployment insurance taxes and state employment taxes, providing worker's compensation insurance, and, most relevant for the present case, complying with numerous state and federal statutes and regulations governing the wages, hours, and working conditions of employees. The worker then obtains the protection of the applicable labor laws and regulations. On the other hand, if a worker should properly be classified as an independent contractor, the business does not bear any of those costs or responsibilities, the worker obtains none of the numerous labor law benefits, and the public