
The most important set of international procedural rules for patentees involve filing and priority dates. To understand them, however, one must first recognize that in practice they interact with elements of each country's domestic law. Recall, in this regard, the crucial divergence between U.S. and foreign priority rules. Until March 15, 2013, the U.S. judged novelty based on the complex 1952 Act first-to-invent regime. Although those rules still apply to applications files up until that date, the U.S. has moved to a first-to-file system, although it uses a unique grace period. All other countries, with trivial exceptions, establish priority based on a "first-to-file" system. If an inventor has an interest in securing patent protection overseas-whether in addition to U.S. protection or in place of it-he or she must file there as soon after invention as possible.

## i. Coordinating International Prosecution

Patent lawyers face two problems in coordinating the prosecution of a series of national patents. First, a common priority date must be obtained to ensure that protection will be uniform and unaffected by prior art published (or otherwise having an effective date) before one or more of the national patent applications. Also, a common date will ensure that prosecution of a patent in country A does not somehow compromise the patentability of the invention in Country B. Second, the patent lawyer has to deal with the logistics of international protection; she must oversce multiple filings in diverse languages in numerous countries. The wide variations in national practices and the high cost of conducting a large-scale application barrage make multiple filings one of the more challenging professional tasks in patent law.

Fortunately, two international agreements make these tasks a bit more tolerable. First is the Paris Convention, a longstanding international organization created by treaty in 1886 whose primary function is to guarantee a uniform worldwide priority date across all member countries. An applicant may file in any member country of the Convention up to one year after an initial (typically home-country) filing, without losing the priority date of the initial filing. (This treatment is provided under United States law in 35 U.S.C. ยง119.) The second international agreement is the Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT), which streamlines the filing of multiple national patent applications. Each agreement in its own way is an indispensable tool of the patent trade. Although detailed discussion of the agreements would take up too much room for this volume, a few words about the essential features of each is in order.

# ii. The Paris Convention 

The Paris Convention was signed in 1883, a product of the first true "internationalization" wave in the field of patent law. Paris CONVENTION FOR THE PROTECTION OF INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY, as last revised, July 14, 1967, 21 U.S.T. 1583, T.I.A.S. No. 6295, 828 U.N.T.S. 305 (the last revision, sometimes referred to as the "Stockholm" revision, entered into force April 26, 1970). Its primary function is to define a common priority date so that one may file an application in one member state and have the benefit of that same filing date when filing later in another member state. One purpose of this is to prevent interlopers from copying patents applied for or issued in one state and claiming them as their own in another, before the legitimate owner has time to file in the other country.

The key provision in the CONVENTION as regards priority is Article 4. The relevant portions read as follows:

## Article 4

A(1) Any person who has duly filed an application for a patent, or for the registration of a utility model, or of an industrial design, or of a trademark, in one of the countries of the Union, or his successor in title, shall enjoy, for the purpose of filing in the other countries, a right of priority in the periods hereinafter fixed.
(2) Any filing that is equivalent to a regular national filing under the domestic legislation of any country of the Union or under bilateral or multilateral treaties concluded between countries of the Union shall be recognized as giving rise to the right of priority.
(3) By a regular national filing is meant any filing that is adequate to establish the date on which the application was filed in the country concerned, whatever may be the subsequent fate of the application.
B. Consequently, any subsequent filing in any of the other countries of the Union before the expiration of the periods referred to above shall not be invalidated by reason of any acts accomplished in the interval, in particular, another filing, the publication or exploitation of the invention, the putting on sale of copies of the design, or the use of the mark, and such acts cannot give rise to any third-party right or any right of personal possession. Rights acquired by third parties before the date of the first application that serves as the basis for the right of priority are reserved in accordance with the domestic legislation of each country of the Union.

C(1) The periods of priority referred to above shall be twelve months for patents and utility models, and six months for industrial designs and trademarks.
Thus filing in one country that is a signatory to the Paris convention gives an applicant some "breathing room"- 12 months in which to prepare to file in other signatory nations.

# iii. The Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) 

The PCT was signed in 1970. The Patent Cooperation Treaty, opened for signature June 19, 1970, 28 U.S.T. 7645, T.I.A.S. No. 8733 (entered into force Jan. 24, 1978). Its major purpose is to streamline the early prosecution stages of patent applications filed in numerous countries. It is often described as a clearinghouse for international patent applications. As a practical matter, its major advantage is that it gives an inventor (and her patent lawyer) more time, a precious commodity in the prosecution of an application destined for many countries. The signatories to the PCT have agreed to permit an applicant to wait for up to 30 months after the initial filing of a patent application in one country to begin the in-depth prosecution of the application in other countries. This allows the inventor more time, compared to non-PCT prosecution, in which to test the product, decide which countries' protection is worthwhile, and pay the patent office filing fees in the various countries.

There are two main parts of the PCT. Chapter 1 provides that an applicant who files in a national patent office may elect within 12 months to add a PCT filing. The PCT filing is simply an additional filing in any national patent office designated in the PCT. In this case, the applicant has up to 20 months from the initial filing to request that the PCT preliminary prosecution procedure be initiated. At that time, the applicant must also select the PCT member nations in which the applicant wishes to prosecute the patent. Note that Chapter 1 preserves the applicant's priority date (in PCT member countries), without having to begin active prosecution, for eight months longer than the simple Paris Convention priority period.

Chapter 2 of the PCT extends the election period to 30 months. To qualify under Chapter 2, the applicant must make her PCT filing at most five months after the first national filing. Chapter 2 gives an inventor 18 extra months, compared to the Paris Convention, to select countries for coverage and initiate multiple national prosecutions. In other words, so-called "Chapter Two" PCT filings give the inventor up to 30 months to make his or her "national elections."

The extra time is a substantial advantage. Besides simply delaying the expenditure of filing and examination fees, the PCT allows an inventor a significant extra period to assess the technical merits and commercial potential of the invention. This extra time helps the inventor save wasted filing fees for inventions that fail to blossom; for those that show great promise, the various patent applications that grow out of the PCT filing can be tailored to reflect the commercially significant embodiments that have emerged from the extensive testing.
