
## i. Promoting Innovation and Creativity

Both the United States Constitution and judicial decisions emphasize incentive theory in justifying intellectual property. The Constitution expressly conditions the grant of power in the patent and copyright clause on a particular end, namely "to Promote the Progress of Science and useful Arts." U.S. CONST., ART. I, ยง8, Cl. 8. As the Supreme Court explained in Mazer v. Stein, 347 U.S. 201 (1954):

The copyright law, like the patent statutes, makes reward to the owner a "secondary consideration." United States v. Paramount Pictures, 334 U.S. 131, 158. However, it is "intended definitely to grant valuable, enforceable rights to authors, publishers, etc., without burdensome requirements: 'to afford greater encouragement to the production of literary [or artistic] works of lasting benefit to the world.'" Washington Pub. Co. v. Pearson, 306 U.S. 30. The economic philosophy behind the clause empowering Congress to grant patents and copyrights is the conviction that it is the best way to advance public welfare through the talents of authors and inventors in "Science and useful Arts." Sacrificial days devoted to such creative activities deserve rewards commensurate with the services rendered.
To understand why the Framers thought exclusive rights in inventions and creations would promote the public welfare, consider what might happen absent any intellectual property protection. Invention and creation require the investment of resources-the time of an author or inventor, and often expenditures on facilities, prototypes, supplies, etc. In a private market economy, individuals will not invest in invention or creation unless the expected return from doing so exceeds the cost of doing so-that is, unless they can reasonably expect to make a profit from the endeavor. To profit from a new idea or work of authorship, the creator must be able either to sell it to others or to put it to some use that provides her with a comparative advantage in a market, such as by reducing the cost of producing goods.

But ideas (and writings, for that matter) are notoriously hard to control. Even if the idea is one that the creator can use herself, for example, to boost productivity in her business, she will sometimes reap a reward from that idea only to the extent that her competitors don't find out about it. A creator who depends on secrecy for value, therefore, lives in constant peril of discovery and disclosure. Competitors may steal the idea or learn of it from an ex-employee. They may be able to figure it out by watching the creator's production process or by examining the products she sells. Finally, they may come upon the idea on their own or discover it in the published literature. In all of these cases, the secrecy value of the idea will be irretrievably lost.

The creator who wants to sell her idea is in an even more difficult position. Selling information requires disclosing it to others. Once the information has been disclosed outside a small group, however, it is extremely difficult to control. Information has the characteristics of what economists call a "public good"-it may be "consumed" by many people without depletion, and it is difficult to identify those who will not pay and prevent them from using the information. See Kenneth J. Arrow, Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Invention, in The Rate and Direction of InVEntive ACTIVITY: ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL FACTORS 609, 614-16 (1962). Once the idea of the intermittent windshield wiper is disclosed, others can imitate its design relatively easily. Once a book is published, others can copy it at low cost. It is difficult to exclude nonpurchasers from sharing in the benefits of the idea. Ideas and information can also be used by many without depleting the enjoyment of others. Unlike an ice cream cone, a good story or the concept of intermittent windshield wipers can be enjoyed by many without diminishing enjoyment of these creations by others. ^1 If we assume that it is nearly costless to distribute information to others-an assumption that was once unrealistic, but now has become much more reasonable with advances in digital technology (including the Internet)-it will prove virtually impossible to charge for information over the medium run in the absence of effective intellectual property or some other means of protection (such as technological protection measures). If the author of a book charges more than the cost of distribution, hoping to recover some of her expenditures in writing the work, competitors will quickly jump in to offer the book at a lower price. Competition will drive the price of the book toward its marginal costin this case, the cost of producing and distributing one additional copy. In such a competitive market, the author will be unable to recoup the fixed cost of writing the book. More to the point, if this holds true generally, authors may be expected to leave the profession in droves, since they cannot make any money at it. The result, according to economic theory, would be an underproduction of books and other works of invention and creation with similar public goods characteristics.

Information is not the only example of a public good. Economists generally offer lighthouses and national defense as examples of public goods, since it is virtually impossible to provide the benefits of either one only to paying clients. It is impossible to exclude some ships and not others from the benefits of a lighthouse. Furthermore, the use of the lighthouse by one ship does not deplete the value of its hazard warning to others. As a result, it would be inefficient to exclude nonpayers from using the lighthouse's warning system even if we could, since consumption of this good is "nonrivalrous" (meaning that everyone can benefit from it once it is produced). For these reasons, the market will in theory undersupply such goods because producers cannot reap the marginal (incremental) value of their investment in providing them. ^2

Can you see why broadcast television signals, beautiful gardens on a public street, and national defense are also public goods?

By contrast, markets for pure private goods, such as ice cream cones, feature exclusivity and rivalrous competition-the ice cream vendor provides the good only to those who pay the price, and the consumer certainly depletes the amount of the good available to others. Thus, the market system provides adequate incentives for the creation of ice cream cones: sellers can exact their cost of production, and the value of the product is fully enjoyed by the purchaser.

In the case of national defense (and most lighthouses), we avoid the underproduction that would result from leaving provision of the good to the market by having the government step in and pay for the public good. For a variety of reasons, we have not gone that route with many forms of information. Instead, the government has created time-limited intellectual property rights over technological inventions and expressive creativity to encourage inventors and authors to invest in the development of new ideas and works of authorship. Thus, the economic justification for intellectual property lies not in rewarding creators for their labor but in ensuring that they (and other creators) have appropriate incentives to engage in innovative and creative activities. Unfortunately, this approach comes at a cost. Granting inventors and authors rights to exclude others from using their inventions, discoveries, and expression limits the diffusion of those ideas and so prevents some others from benefiting from and building upon these advances, at least for the duration of intellectual property protection. In economic terms, intellectual property rights prevent competition in the sale of the particular invention or expressive work covered by those rights, and therefore allows the intellectual property owner to raise the price of that work above the marginal cost of reproducing it. This means that fewer people will acquire the work than if it were distributed on a competitive basis, and they will pay more for access. A fundamental principle of our economic system is the proposition that free market competition will ensure an efficient allocation of resources, absent market failures. In fact, the principal thrust of the antitrust laws serves precisely this goal. In this limited sense, then, intellectual property rights appear to run counter to free market competition: they limit the ability of competitors to copy or closely imitate the intellectual efforts of the first person to develop an idea. These rights enable those possessing intellectual property rights to charge monopoly prices or to otherwise limit competition, such as by controlling the use of the intellectual work in subsequent products.

Because intellectual property rights impose social costs on the public, the intellectual property laws can be justified by the public goods argument only to the extent that they do on balance encourage enough creation and dissemination of new works to offset those costs. One of the reasons that intellectual property rights are limited in scope, duration, and effect is to balance these costs and benefits. For example, the limited term of intellectual property rights ensures that inventions will be freely available after that fixed term. The key to economic efficiency lies in balancing the social benefit of providing economic incentives for creation and the social costs of limiting the diffusion of knowledge. We will encounter this critical trade-off throughout our study of intellectual property. The two examples below highlight some of the major issues.

# a. Economic Incentive Benefit 

Intellectual property protection is necessary to encourage inventors, authors, and artists to invest in the process of creation. Without such protection, others could copy or otherwise imitate the intellectual work without incurring the costs and effort of creation, thereby inhibiting the original creators from reaping a reasonable return on their investment. Consider the following example:

After years of effort and substantial expense, Earnest Inventor develops the Mousomatic, a significantly better mousetrap. Not only does it catch mice better than the competition's trap, but it also neatly packages the dead mice in disposable sanitary bags. Consumers are willing to pay substantially more for this product than for its competitors. The Mousomatic catches the attention of Gizmo Gadget Incorporated. Gizmo copies the basic design of the Mousomatic and offers its version of the Mousomatic at a substantial discount. (Gizmo can still earn a profit at this lower price because it had minimal research and development expense.) To stay in business, Earnest is forced to lower his price. Market competition pushes the price down to the cost of production and distribution. In the end, Earnest is unable to recover his cost of research and development and suffers a loss. Although he has numerous other interesting ideas, he decides that they are not worth pursuing because Gizmo, or some other company, will simply copy them if they turn out well.
The existence of intellectual property rights encourages Earnest and other inventors to pursue their creative efforts. If Earnest can obtain the right to prevent others from copying his inventions, then he stands a much better chance to reap a profit. Hence, he will be much more inclined to make the initial investment in research and development.
In the end, not only will Earnest be wealthier, but the public will be enriched by the new and better products brought forth by intellectual property protection.

# b. Costs of Limiting Diffusion 

Legal protection for ideas and their expression prevents others from using those works to develop similar works that build upon them. Knowledge in society is cumulative. In the words of Sir Isaac Newton, "If I have seen further [than others], it is by standing on the shoulders of giants." Hence, society at large can be harmed by intellectual property protection to the extent that it unnecessarily raises the cost of acquiring a product (through monopoly pricing by the right holder) and limits others from making further advances. Consider the following scenario:

Professor Lee conducts research on drug treatments at University College. Grants from the federal government fund her laboratory. For the past decade, Professor Lee has competed with colleagues at other laboratories to discover the cure for a prevalent form of cancer. It is likely that the first person to discover the cure will win a Nobel Prize, as well as numerous other financial and professional rewards. In early 1995, Professor Lee hits upon the Alpha drug, which cures the disease. She files for and receives a patent. Professor Hu, a researcher at another research institution, independently discovers the identical cure a few months later. With patent in hand, Professor Lee starts selling Alpha for a price 100 times the cost of production. Because Alpha is a life-saving cure, those stricken with the disease who can afford the treatment are more than willing to pay the price. Then, to relieve the suffering of millions, Professor Hu begins selling Alpha at the cost of production. Moreover, she has developed an improvement on the Alpha drug, Alpha+, that reduces the side effects of the treatment. Professor Lee quickly obtains an injunction preventing Hu from selling either version of Alpha for the life of the patent.
This example raises serious questions about whether intellectual property protection is desirable, at least for this class of invention. Professor Lee does not bear significant risk in pursuing the invention because the government and university generously fund her research. Furthermore, the potential for a Nobel Prize, expanded research funding, and professional recognition provide substantial encouragement for Professor Lee to pursue a cure whether or not she gains financially from sales of Alpha. Moreover, other researchers were poised to make the same discovery at about the time that Professor Lee made her discovery. Yet she has the right not only to block sales of Alpha by competitors, but also to block sales of improvements such as Alpha+. Does such a system benefit society? One must also consider that without the financial incentive of a patent, there would perhaps have been less competition to discover and market any cure for cancer.

Similar problems can arise in the copyright domain. In 1936, Margaret Mitchell published her epic novel GONE WITH THE WIND. The plot revolves around Scarlett O'Hara, a hard-working and ambitious Southern woman who lives through the American Civil War and Reconstruction. GONE WITH THE WIND quickly became one of the most popular books ever written, eventually selling more than 30 million copies throughout the world. Ms. Mitchell would receive a Pulitzer Prize, and the novel would become the basis for one of the most successful movies ever.

Sixty-five years later, Alice Randall, an African-American historian, set out to tell the history of the Civil War-era South from another viewpoint. She invented Cynara, a slave on Scarlett's plantation who also happened to be Scarlett's half-sister. Although Mitchell's novel did not depict Cynara, many other characters in Randall's novel mimic characters in the original. Randall's The Wind Done Gone (2001) depicts the mistreatment and suffering of slaves in their vernacular dialect. Randall believed that GONE WITH THE WIND, as the lens through which millions viewed the deep South during the Civil War era, provided a unique vehicle for communicating the racial injustice of American history. Margaret Mitchell's estate sued Randall for copying GONE WITH THE WIND without authorization, obtaining a preliminary injunction. Although Randall eventually prevailed on appeal under the fair use doctrine, Suntrust Bank v. Houghton Mifflin Co., 268 F.3d 1257 (11th Cir. 2001), this controversy illustrates how strong copyright protection can potentially inhibit cumulative creativity.

In applying a utilitarian framework, we must balance the economic incentive benefits of intellectual property rights against the costs of limiting diffusion of knowledge. A critical issue in assessing the need for intellectual property protection is whether innovators have sufficient means to appropriate an adequate return on investment in research and development. In this regard, the market itself often provides means by which inventors can realize sufficient rewards to pursue innovation without formal intellectual property rights beyond contract law. The first to introduce a product can in many contexts earn substantial and long-lived advantages in the market. In many markets, the costs or time required to imitate a product (for example, to reverse engineer a complex machine) are so great that the first to market a product has substantial opportunity for profit. Moreover, as we will see in Chapter II, inventors can often prevent imitation through contractual means, such as trade secrecy and licensing agreements with customers. Where the invention relates to a manufacturing process, the innovator may be able to maintain protection through secrecy even after the product is on the market. Alternatively, a producer may be able to bundle products with essential services and contracts for updates of the product. In addition, the producer may be able to spread the costs of research and development among a group of firms through research joint ventures.

In those areas in which economic incentives for innovation are inadequate, and the creation of intellectual property rights is the most efficacious way of encouraging progress, society must determine the appropriate requirements for, duration and scope of, and set of rights afforded intellectual property. Over the past half century, economists have developed and refined models to assess the appropriate trade-off between the social benefits of providing economic incentives for innovation through intellectual property rights and the social costs of limiting diffusion of knowledge. Professor William Nordhaus developed the first formal model analyzing the optimal duration of intellectual property. His model of the innovative process assumed that investments in research produced a single independent innovation. William Nordhaus, InVEntion, Growth, And Welfare: A Theoretical Treatment of Technological Change 3-7 (1969). In this simple setting, the optimal patent duration balanced the incentive benefits of protection against the deadweight loss of monopoly pricing and the resulting limitations on dissemination.

Since Nordhaus's important early work, economic historians and economic theorists have greatly enriched our understanding of the innovative process and the implications for public policy. Historical and industry studies of the innovation process find that inventions are highly interdependent: "Technologies . . . undergo a gradual, evolutionary development which is intimately bound up with the course of their diffusion." Paul David, New Technology, Diffusion, Public Policy, and Industrial Competitiveness 20 (Center for Economic Policy Research, Pub. No. 46, Apr. 1985). In fact, "secondary inventions"-including essential design improvements, refinements, and adaptations to a variety of uses-are often as crucial to the generation of social benefits as the initial discovery. Economic theorists have developed models of the innovative process incorporating rivalrous and cumulative innovation, uncovering a range of important effects. See Suzanne Scotchmer, Standing on the Shoulders of Giants: Cumulative Research and the Patent Law, 5 J. ECON. PERSPECTIVES 29 (1991). Most notably, excessive protection for first-generation innovation can impede later innovations if licensing is costly. More generally, these models cast doubt on the notion that society can perfectly calibrate intellectual property rewards for each innovation.

As is increasingly evident, the range of innovative activity and creative expression in our society is vast and ever changing. As the materials in this book highlights, the intellectual property institutions and rules that have evolved to promote technology and the arts are intricate. It will be the challenge of future generations of policymakers, judges, and lawyers to refine the ability of the intellectual property system to enhance the public welfare.

# COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS 

1. One significant difference between the natural rights perspective and the utilitarian perspective relates to who is entitled to the fruits of productive labor. In the natural rights framework, the inventor or author is entitled to the social benefits produced by his or her efforts. In the utilitarian framework, reward to the inventor or author is a secondary consideration; the principal objective is to enrich the public at large. Which view is more compelling? Consider in this regard the optimal division of benefits from the invention of Alpha among Professor Lee, Professor Hu, and the public at large. Is Professor Lee entitled to all or even a lion's share of the benefits?
2. In 1996, the REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT'S COMMISSION ON THE PATENT SYSTEM identified four major economic justifications for the patent laws. First, a patent system provides an incentive to invent by offering the possibility of reward to the inventor and to those who support him. This prospect encourages the expenditure of time and private risk capital in research and development efforts. Second, and complementary to the first, a patent system stimulates the investment of additional capital needed for the further development and marketing of the invention. In return, the patent owner is given the right, for a limited period, to exclude others from making, using, or selling the invented product or process. Third, by affording protection, a patent system encourages early public disclosure of technological information, some of which might otherwise be kept secret. Early disclosure reduces the likelihood of duplication of effort by others and provides a basis for further advances in the technology involved. Fourth, a patent system promotes the beneficial exchange of products, services, and technological information across national boundaries by providing protection for industrial property of foreign nationals.

While directed specifically at the patent system, many of these arguments have application to all forms of intellectual property.

Are these incentives necessary to invention and creation? Using cost and other data from publishing companies, Professor (later Justice) Stephen Breyer contended that lead time advantages and the threat of retaliation reduce the cost advantages of copiers, thus obviating if not eliminating the need for copyright protection for books. See Stephen Breyer, The Uneasy Case for Copyright: A Study in Copyright of Books, Photocopies and Computer Programs, 84 HARv. L. Rev. 281 (1970). But see Barry W. Tyerman, The Economic Rationale for Copyright Protection for Published Books: A Reply to Professor Breyer, 18 UCLA L. Rev. 1100 (1971); Stephen Breyer, Copyright: A Rejoinder, 20 UCLA L. Rev. 75 (1972). This debate took place decades ago. Have advances in technology strengthened or weakened Breyer's argument?
3. Intellectual Property as Property. It is tempting to view intellectual property through a tangible property lens. See Richard Epstein, The Disintegration of Intellectual Property? A Classical Liberal Response to a Premature Obituary, 62 StAN. L. Rev. 455 (2010). After all, intellectual property draws on tangible property concepts of first-in-time, exclusivity, and transferability, and scholars have explored the philosophy of tangible property rules and institutions for centuries. However, simplistic Blackstonian conceptions of land and other tangible resources miss a lot of the most important economic and social concerns relating to protecting intangible resources. See Peter S. Menell, Governance of Intellectual Resources and Disintegration of Intellectual Property in the Digital Age, 26 Berkeley Tech. L.J. 1523 (2011); Mark A. Lemley, Property, Intellectual Property, and Free Riding, 83 Tex. L. Rev. 1031 (2005). Nonetheless, tangible property law and institutions dealing with more complex resources (such as water, wild animals, oil and natural gas) and circumstances (control of the dead hand, shared use of resources) offer valuable insights into the design of intellectual property rules and institutions 4. Comparative Institutional Analysis. Numerous institutional mechanisms exist for addressing the public goods problem inherent in the production of ideas and information-direct government funding of research, government research subsidies, promotion of joint ventures, and prizes. The case for intellectual property rights ideally compares all of these options. See Daniel J. Hemel \& Lisa Larrimore Ouellette, Beyond the Patents-Prizes Debate, 92 TEX. L. REV. 303 (2013). Intellectual property rights have the advantage of limiting the government's role in allocating resources to a finite set of decentralized decisions: whether particular inventions are worthy of a fixed period of protection. The market then serves as the principal engine of progress. Decentralized consumers generate demand for products and competing decentralized sellers produce them. By contrast, most other incentive systems, especially large-scale research funding, require central planning on a mass scale. Most economists place more confidence in the former means of allocating resources. The case for intellectual property rights, then, is based more on a generalized perception of institutional choice than on strong direct evidence of the superiority of intellectual property rights relative to the alternatives.

Is the market the best way of allocating resources to inventions in all cases? Claire Xue and Lisa Ouellette have argued that the patent system undersupplies vaccines because preventing a disease is frequently less profitable than treating it, even though society would be better off with prevention. See Claire Xue \& Lisa Ouellette, Innovation Policy and the Market for Vaccines, 7 J. L. \& Biosciences 1 (2020)
4. Open Source Movement. The emergence of cooperative working environments for the development of software has raised questions about the core precept underlying the utilitarian/economic perspective: that exclusive property rights represent the most effective means for promoting creative enterprise. Open source software traces its origins to the early 1970s and the culture of collaborative research on computer software that existed in many software research environments. To perpetuate that model in the face of increasingly proprietary software, Richard Stallman, a former researcher in MIT's Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, established the Free Software Foundation (FSF) to promote users' rights to use, study, copy, modify, and redistribute computer programs. Open source programs such as GNU/Linux have become widely used throughout the computing world. In the process, they have spawned a large community of computer programmers and service organizations committed to the principles of open source development. The growth and success of Linux has brought the open source movement into the mainstream computer software industry. Today, a variety of vendors, such as Red Hat, distribute open source software, and it has tens of millions of users worldwide. Indeed, open source software powers many of the most important internet sites, including Google. Does this experience refute the logic underlying the property rights paradigm or merely broaden the range of viable governance structures?
5. Drawing loosely upon Thomas Jefferson's natural rights insight that "ideas should freely spread from one to another . . . for the moral and mutual instruction of man, and improvement of his condition," AndREw A. LiPsCOMB \& Albert Ellery Bergh Eds., The Writings Of Thomas Jefferson, vol. 13: 333-35 (Writings (document 12): letter from Thomas Jefferson to Isaac McPherson, 13 Aug. 1813) (1905) and The Grateful Dead's success in encouraging fans to distribute bootleg recordings as a way to drive tour and merchandising revenue, John Perry Barlow proclaimed that intellectual property was foolhardy and should not be enforceable on the Internet. John Perry Barlow, The Economy of Ideas, 2.03 Wired 84 (Mar. 1994). This insight resonated with many in the computer hacker community who believe that "information wants to be free." Professor Lawrence Lessig explored and expanded upon this perspective in his books Free Culture: How Big Media Uses Technology and the LaW TO LOCK DOWN Culture and Control Creativity (2004) and The Future of IDEAS: The Fate of the Commons in a CONNECTED WORLD (2001), although he emphasized preserving spaces free of intellectual property. For historical analysis of Jefferson's thinking and its application to intellectual property, see Adam Mossoff, Who Cares What Thomas Jefferson Thought about Patents? Reevaluating the Patent Privilege in Historical Context, 92 Cornell L. Rev. 953 (2007); Justin Hughes, Copyright and Incomplete Historiographies-of Piracy, Propertization, and Thomas Jefferson, 79 S. CAL. L. REV. 993 (2006).

What is likely to happen if we abolish ownership of information on the Internet? In general? Consider the implications for particular works of authorship: musical compositions, sound recordings, software, movies, databases. Will people stop producing these works? Or will other types of incentives and appropriation mechanisms (e.g., encryption, secrecy) continue to encourage invention and creativity? What are the advantages and disadvantages of these alternative mechanisms? Are people intrinsically motivated to create certain types of works, whether or not they get paid? Compare Robert Levine, Free Ride: How Digital Parasites Are Destroying the Culture Business, and How the Culture Business Can Fight Back (2011) and Michele Boldrin \& David Levine, Against Intellectual Monopoly (2007).
6. The rapid growth of generative AI has resulted in the creation of vast numbers of new works of art, music, and writing with minimal human effort. Does an AI need the incentive of copyright to create? Should anyone own new works that are generated in a matter of seconds from a simple prompt?

# ii. Ensuring Integrity of the Marketplace 

Unlike patent and copyright, trademark law does not protect innovation or creativity directly. Rather, it aims to protect the integrity of the marketplace by prohibiting the use of marks associated with particular manufacturers in ways that would cause confusion as to the sources of the goods. In so doing, trademark law reduces consumer confusion and enhances incentives for firms to invest in activities (including R\&D) that improve brand reputation. This function, however, is part of a larger framework of laws and institutions that regulate the quality of information in the marketplace. See Peter S. Menell \& Suzanne Scotchmer, Intellectual Property Law, in 2 HANDBOOK OF LAW AND ECONOMICS 1474, 1536-56 (A. Mitchell Polinsky \& Steven Shavell eds., 2007).

The efficiency of the marketplace depends critically upon the quality of information available to consumers. In markets in which the quality of goods is uniform or easily inspected at the time of purchase, consumers can determine the attributes themselves and no information problem arises. In many markets, however-such as used automobiles, computers, watches, as well as designer handbags-an information asymmetry exists: sellers typically have better information about their products or services than buyers can uncover without buying the product. See George A. Akerlof, The Market for "Lemons": Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism, 84 Q.J.
ECON. 488 (1970). Unscrupulous sellers will be tempted to make false or misleading product claims or copy the trademark of a rival producer known for superior quality. It is often easier to copy a trademark than to duplicate production techniques, quality assurance programs, and the like. For example, two watches that look the same on the outside may have very different mechanical features, manufacturing quality, and composition of materials used.

Proliferation of unreliable information in the marketplace increases consumers' costs of search and distorts the provision of goods. Consumers will have to spend more time and effort inspecting goods, researching the product market, and testing products. Manufacturers will have less incentive to produce quality goods as others will be able to free-ride on such reputations. In markets for products where quality is costly to observe, high-quality manufacturers might not be able to survive without effective mechanisms for policing the source of products and the accuracy of claims relating to unobservable product characteristics.

Trademarks, as concise and unequivocal indicators of the source (e.g., Apple) and nature (e.g., iPhone) of particular goods, counteract the "market for lemons" problem by communicating to consumers the enterprise responsible for the goods and, in some cases, the specifications of the goods. The brand name Coca-Cola, for example, informs the consumer of the maker of the soft drink beverage as well as the taste that they can expect. If the product meets or exceeds expectations, then the trademark owner gains a loyal customer who will be willing to pay a premium in future transactions; if the product disappoints, then the trademark owner will have more difficulty making future sales to that consumer (or will have to offer a discount to attract their business). In this way, trademarks implicitly communicate unobservable characteristics about the quality of branded products, thereby fostering incentives for firms to invest in product quality, even when such attributes are not directly observable prior to a purchasing decision. Sellers who enter the high-quality segment of the market must initially invest in building a strong reputation. Only after consumers become acquainted with the attributes of their brand can they recoup these costs. As this process unfolds, high-quality items can sell for a premium above their costs of production, since consumers will expect them to be of high quality. Trademarks also facilitate efficient new business models, such as franchising, which generate economies of scale and scope in marketing and facilitate rapid business diffusion across vast geographic areas.

The marking of products also creates incentives for disreputable sellers to pass off their own wares as the goods of better-respected manufacturers. Trademark law (as well as false advertising and unfair competition laws more generally) harnesses the incentives of sellers in the marketplace to police the use of marks and advertising claims of competitors. Sellers often have the best information about the quality of products in the marketplace; they also have a direct stake in preventing competitors from free-riding on their brand, reputation, and consumer loyalty. By creating private causes of action, trademark and false advertising law take advantage of this informational base and incentive structure as well as the vast, decentralized enforcement resources of trademark owners to regulate the informational marketplace, effectively in the name of consumers.
As with patent and copyright law, the creation of intellectual property rights in words, phrases, logos, and other identifying product features can entail several types of costs. Protection of descriptive terms as trademarks can increase search costs and impair competition by raising the marketing costs of competitors. For example, if a cookie manufacturer were to obtain a trademark on the word "cookie," then other companies interested in selling cookies would have a much more difficult time communicating the nature of their goods to consumers. If, however, the trademark was to "Mrs. Fields Cookies" and any protection for "cookies" was disclaimed, then potential competitors would be able to describe their products in the most easily recognized manner and would be able to develop their own marks-such as "ACME Cookies." At a minimum, trademark protection for descriptive terms significantly reduces the effective range of terms that others can use commercially.

More generally, trademark protection for descriptive terms can impede competition. Gaining control over the most effective term for describing a product raises the costs of potential competitors seeking to sell in that marketplace. By not being able to use a term or means of communication most easily understood by the consuming public, the entrant must bear higher marketing costs. Limitations on the use of trademarked terms for purposes of comparative advertising would also impede vigorous competition.

Trademark protection can also interfere with both communicative and creative expression. Broad exclusive trademark rights would limit the ability of others (including non-competitors) to comment on and poke fun at trademarks and their owners. As we will see, various doctrines limit such adverse effects. But as trademark protection has expanded beyond the traditional core-for example, to encompass a broad conception of connection to, sponsorship of, and affiliation with a trademark owner-it becomes more difficult to assess the boundaries, leading film and television production companies, for example, to tread carefully (and increasingly incur the costs of licensing transactions) in the use of trademarks in their works.

# COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS 

1. Comparative Institutional Analysis. In addition to private rights of action for trademark infringement and false advertising, several other mechanisms are available to provide and regulate market information, such as deceit and fraud common law causes of action and privately enforced consumer protection statutes, public regulation and public enforcement of unfair competition laws, and industry self-regulation and certification organizations. How do these institutions compare with trademark protection? Should they supplement or substitute for trademark protection?
2. Status Goods. Some trademarks also serve a more ambiguous function: signaling status or identity for some consumers. Some have referred to such commodities as "Veblen" goods, reflecting Thorstein Veblen's theory of conspicuous consumption. See Thorstein Veblen, The Theory of the Leisure Class: An Economic Study of InStitutions (1899). This theory posits that unlike normal goods, demand for status goods increases with their price. Purchasers of such goods may be interested in being associated with a particular brand-such as a Rolex watch, a t-shirt with the name and colors of a particular university, or a corporate brand-possibly apart from whether it is authentic or the quality associated with the authentic good. Some purchasers of such goods may well prefer a less expensive, counterfeit version. They presumably would not be confused when purchasing such goods (e.g., a Rolex watch sold on a street corner for $10 ). Of course, where both buyers and sellers are aware of the difference between cheap imitations of a luxury good and the genuine article, things might be different. It could be that cheap imitations in some ways promote sales of the luxury good.

The marketing of less expensive, lower quality imitations of status goods creates the possibility of separate harm to the sellers and purchasers of authentic goods. The availability of counterfeit articles could well divert some consumers who would otherwise purchase the authentic article, although this effect is likely to be relatively small due to the large price differential and the availability of the authentic goods for those who are interested. The lower quality of the counterfeit goods could, however, erode the goodwill associated with the authentic manufacturer through post-sale confusion-on-lookers who mistake the shoddier counterfeit good for the authentic good and are thereby less inclined to purchase the authentic version, thereby reducing sales by the trademark owner. In addition, due to the proliferation of non-easily recognized "fakes," prior and potential purchasers of the authentic "status" goods may be less interested in owning a much less rare commodity. The value of ownership may be sullied. In essence, status goods exhibit a negative network externality, whereby proliferation of such goods erodes the value to prior purchasers. Should trademark law be concerned with this effect?

^1 To some extent this statement oversimplifies the problem by ignoring possible second-order distorting effects. In practice, if you taught several hundred million people to fish, the result might be depletion of a physical resource (fish) that would otherwise not have occurred. Similarly, wide dissemination of some information may have particular effects on secondary markets.
^2 Ronald Coase questioned the contention that lighthouses must be publicly provided. See Ronald H. Coase, The Lighthouse in Economics, in The Firm, the Market, and the Law (1988); but see David E. Van Zandt, The Lessons of the Lighthouse: "Government" or "Private" Provision of Goods, 22 J. Legal Studies 47 (1993) (reporting that lighthouses relying on voluntary payments failed and that government support played a critical role in their provision); Elodie Bertrand, The Coasean Analysis of Lighthouse Financing: Myths and Realities, 30 CAMBRIDGE J. ECON. 389 (2006).