
Trade secret protection emerged from common law doctrines that protect against the misappropriation of confidential information that is the subject of reasonable efforts to maintain secrecy. As such, they are more akin to traditional tort and contract law than to patent or copyright law. While protection for trade secrets has long been a part of the common law, most states today protect trade secrets by statute. The federal government has taken a growing interest in protecting trade secrets as concerns about international espionage and hacking have grown. The passage of the Defend Trade Secrets Act of 2016 added federal protection for trade secrets.

The purpose of protecting trade secrets is to prevent "theft" of information by unfair or commercially unreasonable means. In essence, trade secret law is a form of private intellectual property law under which creators establish contractual limitations or build legal "fences" that afford protection from misappropriation.

The definition of subject matter eligible for protection is broad: business or technical information of any sort. To be protected by trade secret laws, the information must be a secret. However, only relative and not absolute secrecy is required. In addition, the owner of a trade secret must take reasonable steps to maintain its secrecy. Trade secrets have no definite term of protection but may be protected only as long as they are secret. Once a trade secret is disclosed, protection is lost.

There is no state agency that "issues" (or even registers) trade secrets. Rather, any information that meets the above criteria can be protected. Courts will find misappropriation of trade secrets in two circumstances: (1) where the secrets were obtained by theft or other improper means; or (2) disclosed in violation of an express or implied agreement to keep the information secret. However, trade secret laws do not protect against independent discovery or invention. Nor do they prevent competitors from "reverse engineering" a legally obtained product to determine the secrets contained inside. Moreover, federal trade secret law protects employees and contractors reporting suspected illegal activity to the government or discussing their concerns with counsel if done confidentially. Violations of trade secret law entitle the owner to damages and, in some cases, injunctions against use or further disclosure.
