
Recall that ยง271 (a) (Infringement of patent) refers to "whoever without authority makes, sells, . . " (emphasis added). Thus, an important set of defenses to infringement relate to authorization-either through agreement or by operation of law. Patent licenses can be express or implied.

## i. Express or Implied License

Obviously, an express license to practice a patented invention would preclude a patent suit, since the defendant was using the invention "with authority" from the patent owner. An implied license arises by acquiescence, conduct, equitable estoppel, or legal estoppel. Wang Labs., Inc. v. Mitsubishi Elecs. Am., Inc., 103 F.3d 1571, 1580 (Fed. Cir. 1997). Such licenses are generally revocable. The existence and scope of licenses are generally governed by state contract law.

## ii. The Exhaustion Principle/First Sale Doctrine

Under the exhaustion principle (also referred to as the first sale doctrine), the first unrestricted sale of a patented product exhausts the patentee's control over that product and it can be resold and repaired without implicating the patent owner's rights. The doctrine traces back to the nineteenth century. "[T]he patentee or his assignee having in the act of sale received all the royalty or consideration which he claims for the use of his invention in that particular machine or instrument, it is open to the use of the purchaser without further restriction on account of the monopoly of the patentees." Adams v. Burke, 84 U.S. 453 (1873); see Aro Mfg. Co. v. Convertible Top Replacement Co., 377 U.S. 476,484 (1964) (stating that "it is fundamental that sale of a patented article by the patentee . . . carries with it an 'implied license to use.'").

The Supreme Court reaffirmed the principle of exhaustion in Quanta Computer, Inc. v. LG Electronics, Inc., 533 U.S. 617 (2008). It strongly suggested that once a patentee sold or authorized the sale of a product in this country, its control over that particular product ended, at least as a matter of patent law. It acknowledged that parties could contract for post-sale restrictions, but noted that those restrictions would be evaluated and enforced as a matter of contract, not patent, law. Id. n.7.

The Supreme Court confirmed that conclusion in Impression Prods. v. Lexmark Int'l, 581 U.S. 360 (2017). The case involved a defendant that refilled and refurbished printer toner cartridges in spite of a "single use only" label on the cartridges. Such a "label license" pushes hard against the line that separates a bilateral contract from a unilateral restriction on personal property that purports to "run with the goods," i.e., a restriction that applies to all subsequent transferees who receive notice of the restriction. Such "personal property servitudes" have traditionally been disfavored, on the theory that they gum up free flowing markets for goods. The Court reaffirmed that rule, holding that a patent owner could not assert patent claims against the use or resale of a particular good once it had entered the stream of commerce, whether in the United States or abroad. The patent owner having been paid once, its rights were exhausted. The Court noted that if the patentee entered into a contract limiting the use of the products it sold, that contract might be enforceable-but only under contract, not patent, law.

# COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS 

1. Method Claims. The doctrine of patent exhaustion applies to method claims and the method patent is exhausted by sale of the item that embodies the method. See Quanta Computer, Inc. v. LG Electronics, Inc., 533 U.S. 617 (2008). Although repair of a patented product that has been sold is permissible, reconstruction of the patented technology crosses the line into the patentee's "make" right.
2. Permissible Repair/Impermissible Reconstruction Doctrine. The line between permitted repair and impermissible reconstruction is not easily determined, resulting in vague, context-specific rulings. See, e.g., Hewlett-Packard Co. v. Repeat-O-Type Stencil Mfg. Co., 123 F.3d 1445 (Fed. Cir. 1997) (dealing with refilling of printer cartridges). Such issues frequently arise in the context of contributory infringement claims, where the alleged infringer is providing specialized replacement parts. See, e.g., Everpure v. Cuno, Inc., 875 F.3d 300 (Fed. Cir. 1989) ("Here it is the combination that is protected. The cartridge is not. . . . A purchaser of [Everpure's] filter unit is free to replace the worn out filter cartridge and the fact that it requires a particular cartridge configuration to mate it to the head does not alter the legal principle."). Contractual restrictions on resale or reuse can provoke patent misuse allegations and antitrust counterclaims.
3. Policy Rationale. The exhaustion doctrine has been criticized for interfering with freedom of contract. See Richard A. Epstein, The Disintegration of Intellectual Property? A Classical Liberal Response to a Premature Obituary, 62 Stan. L. Rev. 455, 502-09 (2010). Professor Glen Robinson contends that the traditional hostility to use and resale restraints on personal property is misguided in both the common law and intellectual property contexts. While there may be legitimate reasons for limiting an owner's right to impose posttransfer restrictions on use and resale, those reasons are more exceptional than has been commonly assumed. Moreover, in the new digital world where servitude-type restrictions can be engincered into the architecture of the property itself, public policy restrictions on contractual 'servitudes' may prove to be ineffectual, creating a new reason to take a fresh look at old conceptions of personal property servitudes.
Glen O. Robinson, Personal Property Servitudes, 71 U. Chl. L. Rev. 1449 (2004).
Other scholars (and the Supreme Court, in the copyright context) worry that contractual restrictions on the use of personal property, like non-possessory interests in real property, can greatly complicate the use of resources over time. See Kirtsaeng v. John S. Wiley \& Sons, 568 U.S. 519 (2013); Molly Shaffer Van Houweling, The New Servitudes, 96 Geo. L.J. 885 (2007); Zechariah Chafee, Jr., Equitable Servitudes on Chattels, 41 Harv. L. Rev. 945 (1928); see generally Michael Heller, The Gridlock Economy: How Too Much Ownership Wrecks Markets, Stops Innovation, and Costs Lives (2008). Others have suggested that the issue turns on the optimal standardization of legal regimes. See Thomas W. Merrill \& Henry E. Smith, Optimal Standardization in the Law of Property: The Numerus Clausus Principle, 110 Yale L.J. 1 (2000).
4. Territoriality, Price Discrimination/Gray Goods/Parallel Imports, and International Exhaustion. Patent protection is territorial. Suppose that a patentce decides to sell its patented widget for a high price in the United States and a lower price in Asia. Drug companies often follow this model, with lower prices in lesser developed nations.

Economists refer to this phenomenon as price discrimination. Although it sounds evil, it has various virtues. First, it ensures that the patented good reaches a larger population, thereby reducing the deadweight loss of a single monopoly price. Second, it facilitates companies to provide different levels of services in different regions.

Does the Patent Act bar the authorized purchaser of a U.S. patented good in Asia from importing it to the United States without authorization-i.e., does the sale abroad exhaust the patent rights in the U.S.? As we will see in Chapter IV, the Supreme Court has interpreted the Copyright Act to hold that such a foreign sale does exhaust copyright protection and such good can lawfully be imported into the United States even though the copyright owner has not authorized importation of the good into the United States. See Kirtsaeng v. John Wiley \& Sons, Inc., 568 U.S. 519 (2013). In Impression Prods. v. Lexmark Int'l, 581 U.S. 360 (2017), the Supreme Court extended the international exhaustion principle from copyright to patent protection.

What should a patent owner do if it wants to sell the same product in both rich and poor countries? Is price discrimination now impossible? Or could contracts achieve that goal?

# PROBLEM III-18 

Big Soya, Inc. is a large agricultural chemicals firm that sells a widely used herbicide named WEEDAWAY. Beginning in the 1980s, Big Soya began investing heavily in agricultural biotechnology research, with an eye toward developing advanced herbicides and related products. One of the problems that Big Soya faces, like all herbicide firms, is "selectivity": designing products that kill weeds, but do little or no damage to farm crops. In the mid-1990s, Big Soya researchers hit on the idea of developing a genetically engincered strain of soybeans that is particularly immune to the effects of the popular WEEDAWAY herbicide. By the late 1990s, they had perfected-and patented-special strains of soybean seeds with just these properties, which they called "WEEDAWAY-PROOF" seeds. As part of its strategy to protect the market for its proprictary seeds, Big Soya asks farmers using the seeds to sign a contract restricting the farmers' activities in a number of ways. Specifically, the farmers agree: (1) To use the seed containing Big Soya gene technologies for planting a commercial crop only in a single season; (2) Not to supply any of the seed to any other person or entity for planting, and to not save any crop produced from this seed for replanting, or supply saved seed to anyone for replanting; (3) Not to use the seed or provide it to anyone for crop breeding, research, generation of herbicide registration data, or seed production. The farmers' agreement also contains a clause specifying damages in the event of breach by the farmer:

In the event that the Grower saves, supplies, sells or acquires seed for replant in violation of this Agreement and license restriction, in addition to other remedies available to the technology provider(s), the Grower agrees that damages will include a claim for liquidated damages, which will be based on 120 times the applicable Technology Fee.

In a lawsuit brought against a farmer, Betty Overall, Big Soya alleges that Betty saved seeds from a batch of WEEDAWAY-PROOF soybeans, and used them again the next season. Betty argues that she bought the seeds outright, despite having signed the agreement (which she claims neither to have read nor understood); that farmers have traditionally had the right to plant "saved seed" from the previous year's crops, and that the Plant Variety Protection Act (see below) even enshrines that tradition in a "saved seed" exemption. Betty argues that Big Soya's farmers' agreement and the assertion of its patents against farmers such as Betty is patent misuse. Do you agree? How would you argue the case, based on Motion Picture and the other materials in this chapter?
