
Patent misuse is a judicially created doctrine that bars patentees from enforcing their patent against infringers when they have "misused" the patent. It was first adopted by the Supreme Court in 1917.

## Motion Picture Patents Co. v. Universal Film Manufacturing Co. et al. Supreme Court of the United States 243 U.S. 502 (1917)

MR. JUSTICE CLARKE delivered the opinion of the court.
In this suit relief is sought against three defendant corporations as joint infringers of claim number seven of United States letters patent No. 707,934 granted to Woodville Latham, assignor, on August 26, 1902, for improvements in Projecting-Kinetoscopes. It is sufficient description of the patent to say that it covers a part of the mechanism used in motion picture exhibiting machines for feeding a film through the machine with a regular, uniform and accurate movement and so as not to expose the film to excessive strain or wear.
The defendants in a joint answer do not dispute the title of the plaintiff to the patent but they deny the validity of it, deny infringement, and claim an implied license to use the patented machine.

Evidence which is undisputed shows that the plaintiff on June 20, 1912, in a paper styled "License Agreement" granted to The Precision Machine Company a right and license to manufacture and sell machines embodying the inventions described and claimed in the patent in suit, and in other patents, throughout the United States, its territories and possessions. This agreement contains a covenant on the part of the grantee that every machine sold by it, except those for export, shall be sold "under the restriction and condition that such exhibiting or projecting machines shall be used solely for exhibiting or projecting motion pictures containing the inventions of reissued letters patent No. 12,192, leased by a licensee of the licensor while it owns said patents, and upon other terms to be fixed by the licensor and complied with by the user while the said machine is in use and while the licensor owns said patents (which other terms shall only be the payment of a royalty or rental to the licensor while in use)." . . .

The agreement further provides that the grantee shall not sell any machine at less than the plaintiff's list price, except to jobbers and others for purposes of resale and that it will require such jobbers and others to sell at not less than plaintiff's list price. . . .

It was admitted at the bar that 40,000 of the plaintiff's machines are now in use in this country and that the mechanism covered by the patent in suit is the only one with which motion picture films can be used successfully.

This state of facts presents two questions for decision: . . .
Second. May the assignee of a patent, which has licensed another to make and sell the machine covered by it, by a mere notice attached to such machine, limit the use of it by the purchaser or by the purchaser's lessee to terms not stated in the notice but which are to be fixed, after sale, by such assignee in its discretion? . . .

Since Pennock v. Dialogue, 2 Pet. 1, was decided in 1829 this court has consistently held that the primary purpose of our patent laws is not the creation of private fortunes for the owners of patents but is "to promote the progress of science and useful arts" (Constitution, Art. I, §8). . . .

Plainly, this language of the statute and the established rules to which we have referred restrict the patent granted on a machine, such as we have in this case, to the mechanism described in the patent as necessary to produce the described results. It is not concerned with and has nothing to do with the materials with which or on which the machine operates. The grant is of the exclusive right to use the mechanism to produce the result with any appropriate material, and the materials with which the machine is operated are no part of the patented machine or of the combination which produces the patented result. The difference is clear and vital between the exclusive right to use the machine which the law gives to the inventor and the right to use it exclusively with prescribed materials to which such a license notice as we have here seeks to restrict it. . . . Both in form and in substance the notice attempts a restriction upon the use of the supplies only and it cannot with any regard to propriety in the use of language be termed a restriction upon the use of the machine itself.

Whatever right the owner may have to control by restriction the materials to be used in operating the machine must be derived through the general law from the ownership of the property in the machine and it cannot be derived from or protected by the patent law. . . .

This construction gives to the inventor the exclusive use of just what his inventive genius has discovered. It is all that the statute provides shall be given to him and it is all that he should receive, for it is the fair as well as the statutory measure of his reward for his contribution to the public stock of knowledge. If his discovery is an important one his reward under such a construction of the law will be large, as experience has abundantly proved, and if it be unimportant he should not be permitted by legal devices to impose an unjust charge upon the public in return for the use of it. For more than a century this plain meaning of the statute was accepted as its technical meaning, and that it afforded ample incentive to exertion by inventive genius is proved by the fact that under it the greatest inventions of our time, teeming with inventions, were made. . . .

The construction of the patent law which justifies as valid the restriction of patented machines, by notice, to use with unpatented supplies necessary in the operation of them, but which are no part of them, is believed to have originated in Heaton-Peninsular Button-Fastener Co. v. Eureka Specialty Co., 77 Fed. Rep. 288 (which has come to be widely referred to as the Button-Fastener Case), decided by the Circuit Court of Appeals of the Sixth Circuit in 1896. In this case the court, recognizing the pioncer character of the decision it was rendering, speaks of the "novel restrictions" which it is considering and says that it is called upon "to mark another boundary line around the patentee's monopoly, which will debar him from engrossing the market for an article not the subject of a patent," which it declined to do.

This decision proceeds upon the argument that, since the patentee may withhold his patent altogether from public use he must logically and necessarily be permitted to impose any conditions which he chooses upon any use which he may allow of it. The defect in this thinking springs from the substituting of inference and argument for the language of the statute and from failure to distinguish between the rights which are given to the inventor by the patent law and which he may assert against all the world through an infringement proceeding and rights which he may create for himself by private contract which, however, are subject to the rules of general as distinguished from those of the patent law. While it is true that under the statutes as they were (and now are) a patentee might withhold his patented machine from public use, yet if he consented to use it himself or through others, such use immediately fell within the terms of the statute and as we have seen he is thereby restricted to the use of the invention as it is described in the claims of his patent and not as it may be expanded by limitations as to materials and supplies necessary to the operation of it imposed by mere notice to the public.
. . .The perfect instrument of favoritism and oppression which such a system of doing business, if valid, would put into the control of the owner of such a patent should make courts astute, if need be, to defeat its operation. If these restrictions were sustained plainly the plaintiff might, for its own profit or that of its favorites, by the obviously simple expedient of varying its royalty charge, ruin anyone unfortunate enough to be dependent upon its confessedly important improvements for the doing of business.
... [F]ollowing the decision of the Button-Fastener Case, it was widely contended as obviously sound, that the right existed in the owner of a patent to fix a price at which the patented article might be sold and resold under penalty of patent infringement. But this court, when the question came before it in Bauer v. O'Donnell, 229 U.S. 1, ... decided that the owner of a patent is not authorized by either the letter or the purpose of the law to fix, by notice, the price at which a patented article must be sold after the first sale of it, declaring that the right to vend is exhausted by a single, unconditional sale, the article sold being thereby carried outside the monopoly of the patent law and rendered free of every restriction which the vendor may attempt to put upon it. The statutory authority to grant the exclusive right to "use" a patented machine is not greater, indeed it is precisely the same, as the authority to grant the exclusive right to "vend," and, looking to that authority, for the reasons stated in this opinion we are convinced that the exclusive right granted in every patent must be limited to the invention described in the claims of the patent and that it is not competent for the owner of a patent by notice attached to its machine to, in effect, extend the scope of its patent monopoly by restricting the use of it to materials necessary in its operation but which are no part of the patented invention, or to send its machines forth into the channels of trade of the country subject to conditions as to use or royalty to be paid to be imposed thereafter at the discretion of such patent owner. The patent law furnishes no warrant for such a practice and the cost, inconvenience and annoyance to the public which the opposite conclusion would occasion forbid it.

It is argued as a merit of this system of sale under a license notice that the public is benefitted by the sale of the machine at what is practically its cost and by the fact that the owner of the patent makes its entire profit from the sale of the supplies with which it is operated. This fact, if it be a fact, instead of commending, is the clearest possible condemnation of, the practice adopted, for it proves that under color of its patent the owner intends to and does derive its profit, not from the invention on which the law gives it a monopoly but from the unpatented supplies with which it is used and which are wholly without the scope of the patent monopoly, thus in effect extending the power to the owner of the patent to fix the price to the public of the unpatented supplies as effectively as he may fix the price on the patented machine....

Coming now to the terms of the notice attached to the machine sold to the SeventySecond Street Amusement Company under the license of the plaintiff and to the first question as we have stated it.

This notice first provides that the machine, which was sold to and paid for by the Amusement Company may be used only with moving picture films containing the invention of reissued patent No. 12,192, so long as the plaintiff continues to own this reissued patent.

Such a restriction is invalid because such a film is obviously not any part of the invention of the patent in suit; because it is an attempt, without statutory warrant, to continue the patent monopoly in this particular character of film after it has expired, and because to enforce it would be to create a monopoly in the manufacture and use of moving picture films, wholly outside of the patent in suit and of the patent law as we have interpreted it. . . .

A restriction which would give to the plaintiff such a potential power for evil over an industry which must be recognized as an important element in the amusement life of the nation, under the conclusions we have stated in this opinion, is plainly void, because wholly without the scope and purpose of our patent laws and because, if sustained, it would be gravely injurious to that public interest, which we have seen is more a favorite of the law than is the promotion of private fortunes. . . .
Mr. Justice Holmes, dissenting.
I suppose that a patentee has no less property in his patented machine than any other owner, and that in addition to keeping the machine to himself the patent gives him the further right to forbid the rest of the world from making others like it. In short, for whatever motive, he may keep his device wholly out of use. Continental Paper Bag Co. v. Eastern Paper Bag Co., 210 U.S. 405, 422. So much being undisputed, I cannot understand why he may not keep it out of use unless the licensce, or, for the matter of that, the buyer, will use some unpatented thing in connection with it. Generally speaking the measure of a condition is the consequence of a breach, and if that consequence is one that the owner may impose unconditionally, he may impose it conditionally upon a certain event. Ashley v. Ryan, 153 U.S. 436, 443. Lloyd v. Dollison, 194 U.S. 445, 449. . . .

No doubt this principle might be limited or excluded in cases where the condition tends to bring about a state of things that there is a predominant public interest to prevent. But there is no predominant public interest to prevent a patented tea pot or film feeder from being kept from the public, because, as I have said, the patentee may keep them tied up at will while his patent lasts. Neither is there any such interest to prevent the purchase of the tea or films that is made the condition of the use of the machine. The supposed contravention of public interest sometimes is stated as an attempt to extend the patent law to unpatented articles, which of course it is not, and more accurately as a possible domination to be established by such means. But the domination is one only to the extent of the desire for the tea pot or film feeder, and if the owner prefers to keep the pot or the feeder unless you will buy his tea or films, I cannot see in allowing him the right to do so anything more than an ordinary incident of ownership, or at most, a consequence of the Paper Bag Case, on which, as it seems to me, this case ought to turn. See Grant v. Raymond, 6 Pet. 218, 242. . . .

# COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS 

1. The asserted justification for the patent misuse doctrine lies in the public policy underpinning the patent laws. It is no coincidence, however, that the doctrine first developed around 1900, shortly after the antitrust laws were passed. Patent misuse and antitrust are strikingly similar in the sorts of conduct they prohibit. For example, in Motion Picture, the conduct at issue was (among other things) resale price maintenance, which is per se illegal under the antitrust laws. Patent misuse as originally conceived, however, was broader than the antitrust laws. Neither market power nor actual effect on competition need be proven to show patent misuse, as they would to prove an antitrust violation.
2. The Court continually expanded the scope of the patent misuse doctrine in the decades that followed Motion Picture. That expansion culminated in the cases of Mercoid Corp. v. Mid-Continent Inv. Co., 320 U.S. 661 (1944) and Carbice Corp. v. American Patents Dev. Corp., 283 U.S. 27 (1931). Mercoid held that it was patent misuse to tic a non-staple product to a patented product. A staple product has an existing market beyond use with the patent. A non-staple product has no substantial commercial use except in connection with the patent. Carbice held that a showing of patent misuse (which does not require proof of market power or impact) was prima facie evidence of an antitrust violation.

Both of these rules were short-lived. Congress amended the patent laws in 1952 by adding the following provisions:

# 35 U.S.C. §271. Infringement of Patent 

(c) Whoever offers to sell or sells within the United States or imports into the United States a component of a patented machine, manufacture, combination or composition, or a material or apparatus for use in practicing a patented process, constituting a material part of the invention, knowing the same to be especially made or especially adapted for use in an infringement of such patent, and not a staple article or commodity of commerce suitable for substantial noninfringing use, shall be liable as a contributory infringer.
(d) No patent owner otherwise entitled to relief for infringement or contributory infringement of a patent shall be denied relief or deemed guilty of misuse or illegal extension of the patent right by reason of his having done one or more of the following:
(1) derived revenue from acts which if performed by another without his consent would constitute contributory infringement of the patent;
(2) licensed or authorized another to perform acts which if performed without his consent would constitute contributory infringement of the patent;
(3) sought to enforce his patent rights against infringement or contributory infringement;
(emphasis added). The Supreme Court explicated the importance of this statutory limit on the patent misuse doctrine in Dawson Chem. Co. v. Rohm \& Haas Co., 448 U.S. 176. 200-01 (1980):

Section 271 (c) identifies the basic dividing line between contributory infringement and patent misuse. It adopts a restrictive definition of contributory infringement that distinguishes between staple and nonstaple articles of commerce. It also defines the class of nonstaple items narrowly. In essence, this provision places materials like the dry ice of the Carbice case outside the scope of the contributory infringement doctrine. As a result, it is no longer necessary to resort to the doctrine of patent misuse in order to deny patentees control over staple goods used in their inventions.

The limitations on contributory infringement written into §271 (c) are counterbalanced by limitations on patent misuse in §271 (d). Three species of conduct by patentees are expressly excluded from characterization as misuse. First, the patentee may "deriv[e] revenue" from acts that "would constitute contributory infringement" if "performed by another without his consent." This provision clearly signifies that a patentee may make and sell nonstaple goods used in connection with his invention. Second, the patentee may "licens[e] or authoriz[e] another to perform acts" which without such authorization would constitute contributory infringement. This provision's use in the disjunctive of the term "authoriz[e]" suggests that more than explicit licensing agreements is contemplated. Finally, the patentee may "enforce his patent rights against ... contributory infringement." This provision plainly means that the patentee may bring suit without fear that his doing so will be regarded as an unlawful attempt to suppress competition. The statute explicitly states that a patentee may do "one or more" of these permitted acts, and it does not state that he must do any of them.

In our view, the provisions of §271 (d) effectively confer upon the patentee, as a lawful adjunct of his patent rights, a limited power to exclude others from competition in nonstaple goods. A patentee may sell a nonstaple article himself while enjoining others from marketing that same good without his authorization. By doing so, he is able to eliminate competitors and thereby to control the market for that product. Moreover, his power to demand royaltics from others for the privilege of selling the nonstaple item itself implies that the patentee may control the market for the nonstaple good; otherwise, his "right" to sell licenses for the marketing of the nonstaple good would be meaningless, since no one would be willing to pay him for a superfluous authorization.
3. Congress has shown continued dissatisfaction with the scope of the patent misuse doctrine. In 1988, it passed the Patent Misuse Reform Act, which added an additional limitation on the patent misuse doctrine.
§271 (d) No patent owner otherwise entitled to relief for infringement or contributory infringement of a patent shall be denied relief or deemed guilty of misuse or illegal extension of the patent right by reason of his having done one or more of the following: ... (4) refused to license or use any rights to the patent; or (5) conditioned the license of any rights to the patent or the sale of the patented product on the acquisition of a license to rights in another patent or purchase of a separate product, unless, in view of the circumstances, the patent owner has market power in the relevant market for the patent or patented product on which the license or sale is conditioned.
There is obviously a great deal of overlap between the policies of the patent misuse doctrine and those underlying the antitrust laws. If misuse claims are not tested by conventional antitrust principles, what principles apply?
4. Differences in Patent Misuse and Conventional Antitrust Doctrines. Patent misuse extends (or may extend) to a number of practices that do not fall within the antitrust laws at all. Here are the principal contexts:

- Nonmetered Licenses. Patentees are entitled to charge royalties on the patents they license to others. What form may those license payments take? Hazeltine Research, a consumer electronics patent consortium, charged a royalty based on a flat percentage of a purchaser's sales, regardless of how many patents the purchaser needed or how important they were to the end product. The Court upheld this arrangement in 1950 in Automatic Radio Mfg. Co. v. Hazeltine Research, Inc., 339 U.S. 827, 833-34 (1950). But in Zenith Radio Corp. v. Hazeltine Research, Inc., 395 U.S. 100 (1969), the Court struck down the royalty provision: "We also think patent misuse inheres in a patentee's insistence on a percentage-of-sales royalty, regardless of use, and his rejection of licensee proposals to pay only for actual use. Unquestionably, a licensee must pay if he uses the patent.... There is nothing in the right granted the patentee to keep others from using, selling, or manufacturing his invention which empowers him to insist on payment not only for use but also for producing products which do not employ his discoveries at all."

What is wrong with nonmetered royalties? See Robert Bork, The ANTITRUST PARADOX (1978); RICHARD A. POSNER, ANTITRUST LAW: AN ECONOMIC PERSPECTIVE (1976). If a licensee is only willing to pay a fixed amount for a license, should it matter how that amount is collected? Certainly the "percentage of sales" formula is not itself anticompetitive, and it may be far more convenient than more exact measures of how much a licensee uses a patent. Should the transaction costs of royalty accounting come into play in deciding whether a practice amounts to misuse? One problem with agreements requiring licensees to pay a percentage of all sales is that they also provide an effective source of information for policing a cartel.

- Grantback Clauses. As a condition to a license agreement, a patentee will sometimes require the licensee to grant him rights to any "improvement patents" the licensee is issued while using the licensed patent. Courts have been fairly lenient with respect to such "grantback clauses." Sie Transparent-Wrap Mach. Corp. v. Stokes \& Smith Co., 329 U.S. 637 (1947). But grantbacks may sometimes run afoul of the patent misuse doctrine. Grantbacks are common in agreements among independent patent holders to bundle their patents together for "one stop licensing"-an arrangement called a patent pool. Because pools constitute agreements amongst would-be competitors, they have traditionally been suspect under antitrust law, though a fair number have been approved. For a discussion of pool formation, and the proper way to determine whether they are useful or anticompetitive, see Robert P. Merges and Michael Mattioli, Measuring the Costs and Benefits of Patent Pools, 78 OHIO ST. L.J. 281 (2017).

- Field-of-Use Restrictions. Most patent licenses contain some sort of restriction on how the patent may be used by the licensee. Restrictions that attempt to control the price at which the licensee sells products made using the patented process or equipment are illegal per se under Sherman Act §1. Other restrictions, however, control not the price but the geographic or product market in which the licensee sells. These agreements have generally been upheld, unless they are part of a tying arrangement.
- Post-Expiration Royalties. The Supreme Court held in Brulotte v. Thys Co., 379 U.S. 29, 32 (1964), that license agreements providing for payment of patent royalties beyond the expiration of a patent are per se patent unlawful. The Supreme Court reaffirmed that decision in Kimble v. Marvel Entertainment, LLC, 576 U.S. 446 (2015).

