
Notwithstanding the absolute language of §271 (a), there is a judicially created exception to infringement that is commonly known as the "experimental use" exception. The doctrine had its origins in Justice Joseph Story's opinion in Whittemore v. Cutter, 29 F. Cas. 1120 (C.C.D. Mass. 1813) (No. 17,600). In that case, the defendant appealed a jury instruction to the effect that the "making of a machine . . . with a design to use it for profit" constituted infringement. Justice Story upheld the trial judge's instruction and stated that "it could never have been the intention of the legislature to punish a man, who constructed such a machine merely for philosophical experiments, or for the purpose of ascertaining the sufficiency of the machine to produce its described effects." 29 F. Cas. at 1121 .

Madey v. Duke University United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit 307 F.3d 1351 (Fed. Cir. 2002)
GAJARSA, CIRCUIT JUDGE.
In the mid-1980s Madey was a tenured research professor at Stanford University. At Stanford, he had an innovative laser research program, which was highly regarded in the scientific community. An opportunity arose for Madey to consider leaving Stanford and take a tenured position at Duke. Duke recruited Madey, and in 1988 he left Stanford for a position in Duke's physics department. In 1989 Madey moved his free electron laser ("FEL") research lab from Stanford to Duke. The FEL lab contained substantial equipment, requiring Duke to build an addition to its physics building to house the lab. In addition, during his time at Stanford, Madey had obtained sole ownership of two patents practiced by some of the equipment in the FEL lab.

At Duke, Madey served for almost a decade as director of the FEL lab. During that time the lab continued to achieve success in both research funding and scientific breakthroughs. However, a dispute arose between Madey and Duke. Duke contends that, despite his scientific prowess, Madey ineffectively managed the lab. Madey contends that Duke sought to use the lab's equipment for research areas outside the allocated scope of certain government funding, and that when he objected, Duke sought to remove him as lab director. Duke eventually did remove Madey as director of the lab in 1997. The removal is not at issue in this appeal, however, it is the genesis of this unique patent infringement case. As a result of the removal, Madey resigned from Duke in 1998. Duke, however, continued to operate some of the equipment in the lab. Madey then sued Duke for patent infringement of his two patents, and brought a variety of other claims. . . .

# II. DISCUSSION 

## The Experimental Use Defense

. . . Madey contends that the Supreme Court's opinion in Warner-Jenkinson Co. v. Hilton Davis Chem. Co., 520 U.S. 17 (1997) eliminates the experimental use defense. The Supreme Court held in Warner-Jenkinson that intent plays no role in the application of the doctrine of equivalents. Warner-Jenkinson, 520 U.S. at 36. Madey implicitly argues that the experimental use defense necessarily incorporates an intent inquiry, and thus is inconsistent with Warner-Jenkinson. . . [W]e do not view such an inconsistency as inescapable, and conclude the experimental use defense persists albeit in the very narrow form articulated by this court in Embrex [v. Service Engineering Corp.], 216 F.3d [1343, 1349 [(Fed. Cir. 2000)].

## The District Court Improperly Shifted the Burden to Madey

As a precursor to the burden-shifting issue, Madey argues that the experimental use defense is an affirmative defense that Duke must plead or lose. We disagree. Madey points to no source of authority for its assertion that experimental use is an affirmative defense. Indeed, we have referred to the defense in a variety of ways. See Roche [Products, Inc. v. Bolar Pharmaceutical Co., Inc., 733 F.2d 858, 862, 221 (Fed. Cir. 1984)] (referring to experimental use as both an exception and a defense). Given this lack of precise treatment in the precedent, Madey has no basis to support its affirmative defense argument. . . .
The district court held that in order for Madey to overcome his burden to establish actionable infringement, he must establish that Duke did not use the patent-covered free electron laser equipment solely for experimental or other non-profit purposes. Madey argues that this improperly shifts the burden to the patentee and conflates the experimental use defense with the initial infringement inquiry.

We agree with Madey that the district court improperly shifted the burden to him. The district court folded the experimental use defense into the baseline assessment as to whether Duke infringed the patents. . . [The district court] erroneously required Madey to show as a part of his initial claim that Duke's use was not experimental. The defense, if available at all, must be established by Duke.

# The District Court's Overly Broad Conception of Experimental Use 

Madey argues, and we agree, that the district court had an overly broad conception of the very narrow and strictly limited experimental use defense. The district court stated that the experimental use defense inoculated uses that "were solely for research, academic, or experimental purposes," and that the defense covered use that "is made for experimental, non-profit purposes only." Both formulations are too broad and stand in sharp contrast to our admonitions in Embrex and Roche that the experimental use defense is very narrow and strictly limited. In Embrex, we followed the teachings of Roche and Pitcairn [v. United States, 212 Ct. Cl. 168, 547 F.2d 1106 (1976)) to hold that the defense was very narrow and limited to actions performed "for amusement, to satisfy idle curiosity, or for strictly philosophical inquiry." Embrex, 216 F.3d at 1349. Further, use does not qualify for the experimental use defense when it is undertaken in the "guise of scientific inquiry" but has "definite, cognizable, and not insubstantial commercial purposes." Id. (quoting Roche, 733 F.2d at 863). The concurring opinion in Embrex expresses a similar view: use is disqualified from the defense if it has the "slightest commercial implication." Id. at 1353. Moreover, use in keeping with the legitimate business of the alleged infringer does not qualify for the experimental use defense. See Pitcairn, 547 F.2d at 1125-26. The district court supported its conclusion with a citation to Ruth v. Stearns-Roger Mfg. Co., 13 F.Supp. 697, 713 (D.Colo. 1935), a case that is not binding precedent for this court.

The Ruth case represents the conceptual dilemma that may have led the district court astray. Cases evaluating the experimental use defense are few, and those involving nonprofit, educational alleged infringers are even fewer. In Ruth, the court concluded that a manufacturer of equipment covered by patents was not liable for contributory infringement because the end-user purchaser was the Colorado School of Mines, which used the equipment in furtherance of its educational purpose. Thus, the combination of apparent lack of commerciality, with the non-profit status of an educational institution, prompted the court in Ruth, without any detailed analysis of the character, nature and effect of the use, to hold that the experimental use defense applied. This is not consistent with the binding precedent of our case law postulated by Embrex, Roche and Pitcairn.

Our precedent clearly does not immunize use that is in any way commercial in nature. Similarly, our precedent does not immunize any conduct that is in keeping with the alleged infringer's legitimate business, regardless of commercial implications. For example, major research universities, such as Duke, often sanction and fund research projects with arguably no commercial application whatsoever. However, these projects unmistakably further the institution's legitimate business objectives, including educating and enlightening students and faculty participating in these projects. These projects also serve, for example, to increase the status of the institution and lure lucrative research grants, students and faculty.

In short, regardless of whether a particular institution or entity is engaged in an endeavor for commercial gain, so long as the act is in furtherance of the alleged infringer's legitimate business and is not solely for amusement, to satisfy idle curiosity, or for strictly philosophical inquiry, the act does not qualify for the very narrow and strictly limited experimental use defense. Moreover, the profit or non-profit status of the user is not determinative.

In the present case, the district court attached too great a weight to the non-profit, educational status of Duke, effectively suppressing the fact that Duke's acts appear to be in accordance with any reasonable interpretation of Duke's legitimate business objectives. ^7 On remand, the district court will have to significantly narrow and limit its conception of the experimental use defense. The correct focus should not be on the nonprofit status of Duke but on the legitimate business Duke is involved in and whether or not the use was solely for amusement, to satisfy idle curiosity, or for strictly philosophical inquiry....

# COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS 

1. Is the Ivory Tower Just Another Office Building? Do the aggressive patent acquisition, licensing, and enforcement activities of universities undermine the legitimacy of their claims to "special treatment" under the research exemption? See Derek Bok, Universities in the Marketplace: The Commercialization of Higher Education 201 (2003) ("Universities may not yet be willing to trade all of their values for money, but they have proceeded much further down that road than they are generally willing to acknowledge."); Mark A. Lemley, Are Universities Patent Trolls?, 16 Fordham Intell. Prop., Media, \& Ent. L.J. 611 (2008).
2. Scope of Experimental Use. Do you think that experimental use should be broader? Note that the Patent Act permits patents on "improvements thereof."

Based on the history and rationale of the experimental use doctrine, Professor Rebecca Eisenberg contends that research to check the adequacy of the specification and the validity of the patent holder's claims about the invention should be exempt from infringement liability. Rebecca Eisenberg, Patents and the Progress of Science: Exclusive Rights and Experimental Use, 56 U. CHI. L. REV. 1017 (1989). By contrast, research use of a patented invention with a primary or significant market among research users should not be exempt from infringement liability when the research user is an ordinary consumer of the patented invention.

Professor Eisenberg argues for a middle ground where a researcher uses a patented invention in a way that could potentially lead to improvements in the patented technology or to the development of alternative means of achieving the same purpose. In those scenarios, it might be appropriate to award a reasonable royalty after the fact to be sure that the patent holder receives an adequate return on the initial investment in developing the patented invention. The patent holder should not, however, be entitled to enjoin the use of a patented invention in such efforts to improve upon the patented technology. How would you go about setting the reasonable royalty in a case where a subsequent improver infringed a patent in the course of developing a superior alternative that destroys the patentee's market?
3. The European Patent Convention provides that patent protection "does not extend to acts done for experimental purposes relating to the subject matter of the patented invention." Art. 27(b), European Patent Convention (implemented in all EU states except Austria). See also Patent Act of the People's Republic of China, Article 69(4) (shall not be patent infringement "(4) Any person uses the relevant patent specially for the purpose of scientific research and experimentation"). Would these provisions have immunized Duke University?
4. Use of Patented Technology for Drug Testing. Generic drug companies would like to enter the market as soon as a patent expires. This is also valuable for drug consumers who benefit from competitive pricing. To be ready to hit the ground running. however, the generic company needs FDA approval to market the drug. In Roche Products, Inc. v. Bolar Pharmaceutical Co., 733 F.2d 858 (Fed. Cir. 1984), the Federal Circuit held that the experimental use exception did not include "the limited use of a patented drug for testing and investigation strictly related to FDA drug approval requirements.... Bolar may intend to perform "experiments," but unlicensed experiments conducted with a view to the adaption of the patented invention to the experimentor's business are a violation of the rights of the patentee to exclude others from using his patented invention." 733 F. 2 d at 861,863 .
5. Bolar Amendment: Statutory Experimental Use Exception for Drug Testing. Congress passed the Drug Price Competition and Patent Term Restoration Act, Pub. L. 98-417 (1984), informally known as the Hatch-Waxman Act. The Act establishes an Abbreviated New Drug Application (ANDA) process to speed entry of generic drugs onto the marketplace after a patent expires. Congress overtumed the Bolar decision by enacting §271(c)(1) :
it shall not be an act of infringement to make, use, offer to sell, or sell within the United States or import into the United States a patented invention . . . solely for uses reasonably related to the development and submission of information under a Federal law which regulates the manufacture, use, or sale of drugs or veterinary biological products.
The Supreme Court held in Merck KGaA v. Integra Life Sciences I Ltd., 545 U.S. 193 (2005), that the exemption broadly protects any pre-clinical testing of patented compounds that is reasonably related to the submission of information to a regulatory agency, and not just late-stage safety and efficacy testing in human subjects. Integra owned five patents to "RGD peptides," small proteins that attach tightly to certain binding sites on the surfaces of blood vessel cells. Researchers working in cooperation with Merck discovered that RGD peptides could be used to block receptors active during the proliferation of blood vessel cells. Because this has the effect of slowing down blood vessel growth, it is an effective way to inhibit the growth of tumors. Merck and its research collaborators used RGD peptides in two different ways: (1) to test them directly as tumor-inhibiting agents; and (2) as "benchmarks" against which to measure other compounds they were developing for tumor inhibition.

The Supreme Court held that the Bolar Amendment immunized Merck's use of Integra's patents:

Congress did not limit §271(e)(1)'s safe harbor to the development of information for inclusion in a submission to the FDA; nor did it create an exemption applicable only to the research relevant to filing an ANDA for approval of a generic drug. Rather, it exempted from infringement all uses of patented compounds "reasonably related" to the process of developing information for submission under any federal law regulating the manufacture, use, or distribution of drugs. We decline to read the "reasonable relation" requirement so narrowly as to render §271(e)(1) 's stated protection of activities leading to FDA approval for all drugs illusory. Properly construed, §271(c)(1) leaves adequate space for experimentation and failure on the road to regulatory approval: At least where a drugmaker has a reasonable basis for believing that a patented compound may work, through a particular biological process, to produce a particular physiological effect, and uses the compound in research that, if successful, would be appropriate to include in a submission to the FDA, that use is "reasonably related" to the "development and submission of information under . . . Federal law."
545 U.S. 206-07. Some have suggested that this result discourages pharmaceutical companies from disclosing their research. See Lawrence B. Ebert, In Favor of the Federal Circuit Position in Merck v. Integra, 87 J. Pat. \& Trademark Off. Soc'y 321, 339-40 (2005).


^7 Duke's patent and licensing policy may support its primary function as an educational institution. See Duke University Policy on Inventions, Patents, and Technology Transfer (1996), available at http://www.ors.duke.edu/policies/patpol.htm (last visited Oct. 3, 2002). Duke, however, like other major research institutions of higher learning, is not shy in pursuing an aggressive patent licensing program from which it derives a not insubstantial revenue stream.