
Besides the existence of a trade secret, plaintiffs must show under the Uniform Act that they have taken "reasonable measures" to protect the secrecy of their idea. Certainly, a plaintiff cannot publicly disclose the secret and still expect to protect it. But precautions must go further than that. Generally, they must include certain efforts to prevent theft or use of the idea by former employees.

## Rockwell Graphic Systems, Inc. v. DEV Industries, Inc. United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit 925 F.2d 174 (7th Cir. 1991)

## POSNER, CIRCUIT JUDGE:

This is a suit for misappropriation of trade secrets. Rockwell Graphic Systems, a manufacturer of printing presses used by newspapers, and of parts for those presses, brought the suit against DEV Industries, a competing manufacturer, and against the president of DEV, who used to be employed by Rockwell. . . .

When we said that Rockwell manufactures both printing presses and replacement parts for its presses-"wear parts" or "piece parts," they are called-we were speaking approximately. Rockwell does not always manufacture the parts itself. Sometimes when an owner of one of Rockwell's presses needs a particular part, or when Rockwell anticipates demand for the part, it will subcontract the manufacture of it to an independent machine shop, called a "vendor" by the parties. When it does this it must give the vendor a "piece part drawing" indicating materials, dimensions, tolerances, and methods of manufacture. Without that information the vendor could not manufacture the part. Rockwell has not tried to patent the piece parts. It believes that the purchaser cannot, either by inspection or by "reverse engineering" (taking something apart in an effort to figure out how it was made), discover how to manufacture the part; to do that you need the piece part drawing, which contains much information concerning methods of manufacture, alloys, tolerances, etc. that cannot be gleaned from the part itself. So Rockwell tries-whether hard enough is the central issue in the case-to keep the piece part drawings secret, though not of course from the vendors; they could not manufacture the parts for Rockwell without the drawings. DEV points out that some of the parts are for presses that Rockwell no longer manufactures. But as long as the presses are in service-which can be a very long time-there is a demand for replacement parts.

Rockwell employed Fleck and Peloso in responsible positions that gave them access to piece part drawings. Fleck left Rockwell in 1975 and three years later joined DEV as its president. Peloso joined DEV the following year after being fired by Rockwell when a security guard caught him removing piece part drawings from Rockwell's plant. This suit was brought in 1984, and pretrial discovery by Rockwell turned up 600 piece part drawings in DEV's possession, of which 100 were Rockwell's. DEV claimed to have obtained them lawfully, either from customers of Rockwell or from Rockwell vendors, contrary to Rockwell's claim that either Fleck and Peloso stole them when they were employed by it or DEV obtained them in some other unlawful manner, perhaps from a vendor who violated his confidentiality agreement with Rockwell. Thus far in the litigation DEV has not been able to show which customers or vendors lawfully supplied it with Rockwell's piece part drawings.

The defendants persuaded the magistrate and the district judge that the piece part drawings weren't really trade secrets at all, because Rockwell made only perfunctory efforts to keep them secret. Not only were there thousands of drawings in the hands of the vendors; there were thousands more in the hands of owners of Rockwell presses, the customers for piece parts. The drawings held by customers, however, are not relevant. They are not piece part drawings, but assembly drawings. . . . An assembly drawing shows how the parts of a printing press fit together for installation and also how to integrate the press with the printer's other equipment. Whenever Rockwell sells a printing press it gives the buyer assembly drawings as well. These are the equivalent of instructions for assembling a piece of furniture. Rockwell does not claim that they contain trade secrets. It admits having supplied a few piece part drawings to customers, but they were piece part drawings of obsolete parts that Rockwell has no interest in manufacturing and of a safety device that was not part of the press as originally delivered but that its customers were clamoring for; more to the point, none of these drawings is among those that Rockwell claims DEV misappropriated.
. . DEV's main argument is that Rockwell was impermissibly sloppy in its efforts to keep the piece part drawings secret.

On this, the critical, issue, the record shows the following. (Because summary judgment was granted to DEV, we must construe the facts as favorably to Rockwell as is reasonable to do.) Rockwell keeps all its engineering drawings, including both piece part and assembly drawings, in a vault. Access not only to the vault, but also to the building in which it is located, is limited to authorized employees who display identification. These are mainly engineers, of whom Rockwell employs 200. They are required to sign agreements not to disseminate the drawings, or disclose their contents, other than as authorized by the company. An authorized employee who needs a drawing must sign it out from the vault and return it when he has finished with it. But he is permitted to make copies, which he is to destroy when he no longer needs them in his work. The only outsiders allowed to see piece part drawings are the vendors (who are given copies, not originals). They too are required to sign confidentiality agreements, and in addition each drawing is stamped with a legend stating that it contains proprietary material. Vendors, like Rockwell's own engineers, are allowed to make copies for internal working purposes, and although the confidentiality agreement that they sign requires the vendor to return the drawing when the order has been filled, Rockwell does not enforce this requirement. The rationale for not enforcing it is that the vendor will need the drawing if Rockwell reorders the part. Rockwell even permits unsuccessful bidders for a piece part contract to keep the drawings, on the theory that the high bidder this round may be the low bidder the next. But it does consider the ethical standards of a machine shop before making it a vendor, and so far as appears no shop has ever abused the confidence reposed in it.

The mere fact that Rockwell gave piece part drawings to vendors-that is, disclosed its trade secrets to "a limited number of outsiders for a particular purpose"-did not forfeit trade secret protection. On the contrary, such disclosure, which is often necessary to the efficient exploitation of a trade secret, imposes a duty of confidentiality on the part of the person to whom the disclosure is made. But with 200 engineers checking out piece part drawings and making copies of them to work from, and numerous vendors receiving copies of piece part drawings and copying them, tens of thousands of copies of these drawings are floating around outside Rockwell's vault, and many of these outside the company altogether. Although the magistrate and the district judge based their conclusion that Rockwell had not made adequate efforts to maintain secrecy in part at least on the irrelevant fact that it took no efforts at all to keep its assembly drawings secret, DEV in defending the judgment that it obtained in the district court argues that Rockwell failed to take adequate measures to keep even the piece part drawings secret. Not only did Rockwell not limit copying of those drawings or insist that copies be returned; it did not segregate the piece part drawings from the assembly drawings and institute more secure procedures for the former. So Rockwell could have done more to maintain the confidentiality of its piece part drawings than it did, and we must decide whether its failure to do more was so plain a breach of the obligation of a trade secret owner to make reasonable efforts to maintain secrecy as to justify the entry of summary judgment for the defendants.

The requirement of reasonable efforts has both evidentiary and remedial significance . . .
[T]he plaintiff must prove that the defendant obtained the plaintiff's trade secret by a wrongful act, illustrated here by the alleged acts of Fleck and Peloso in removing piece part drawings from Rockwell's premises without authorization, in violation of their employment contracts and confidentiality agreements, and using them in competition with Rockwell. Rockwell is unable to prove directly that the 100 piece part drawings it got from DEV in discovery were stolen by Fleck and Peloso or obtained by other improper means. But if it can show that the probability that DEV could have obtained them otherwise - that is, without engaging in wrongdoing-is slight, then it will have taken a giant step toward proving what it must prove in order to recover under the first theory of trade secret protection. The greater the precautions that Rockwell took to maintain the secrecy of the piece part drawings, the lower the probability that DEV obtained them properly and the higher the probability that it obtained them through a wrongful act; the owner had taken pains to prevent them from being obtained otherwise.
... If Rockwell expended only paltry resources on preventing its piece part drawings from falling into the hands of competitors such as DEV, why should the law, whose machinery is far from costless, bother to provide Rockwell with a remedy? The information contained in the drawings cannot have been worth much if Rockwell did not think it worthwhile to make serious efforts to keep the information secret.

The remedial significance of such efforts lies in the fact that if the plaintiff has allowed his trade secret to fall into the public domain, he would enjoy a windfall if permitted to recover damages merely because the defendant took the secret from him, rather than from the public domain as it could have done with impunity. It would be like punishing a person for stealing property that he believes is owned by another but that actually is abandoned property. If it were true, as apparently it is not, that Rockwell had given the piece part drawings at issue to customers, and it had done so without requiring the customers to hold them in confidence, DEV could have obtained the drawings from the customers without committing any wrong. The harm to Rockwell would have been the same as if DEV had stolen the drawings from it, but it would have had no remedy, having parted with its rights to the trade secret. . . .

It is easy to understand therefore why the law of trade secrets requires a plaintiff to show that he took reasonable precautions to keep the secret a secret. If analogies are needed, one that springs to mind is the duty of the holder of a trademark to take reasonable efforts to police infringements of his mark, failing which the mark is likely to be deemed abandoned, or to become generic or descriptive (and in either event be unprotectable). The trademark owner who fails to police his mark both shows that he doesn't really value it very much and creates a situation in which an infringer may have been unaware that he was using a proprietary mark because the mark had drifted into the public domain, much as DEV contends Rockwell's piece part drawings have done.

But only in an extreme case can what is a "reasonable" precaution be determined on a motion for summary judgment, because the answer depends on a balancing of costs and benefits that will vary from case to case and so require estimation and measurement by persons knowledgeable in the particular field of endeavor involved. On the one hand, the more the owner of the trade secret spends on preventing the secret from leaking out, the more he demonstrates that the secret has real value deserving of legal protection, that he really was hurt as a result of the misappropriation of it, and that there really was misappropriation. On the other hand, the more he spends, the higher his costs. The costs can be indirect as well as direct. The more Rockwell restricts access to its drawings, either by its engineers or by the vendors, the harder it will be for either group to do the work expected of it. Suppose Rockwell forbids any copying of its drawings. Then a team of engineers would have to share a single drawing, perhaps by passing it around or by working in the same room, huddled over the drawing. And how would a vendor be able to make a piece part-would Rockwell have to bring all that work in house? Such reconfigurations of patterns of work and production are far from costless; and therefore perfect security is not optimum security.
There are contested factual issues here, bearing in mind that what is reasonable is itself a fact for purposes of Rule 56 of the civil rules. Obviously Rockwell took some precautions, both physical (the vault security, the security guards-one of whom apprehended Peloso in flagrante delicto) and contractual, to maintain the confidentiality of its piece part drawings. Obviously it could have taken more precautions. But at a cost, and the question is whether the additional benefit in security would have exceeded that cost. . . .

Reversed and remanded.

# COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS 

1. Contrast Rockwell with the Minnesota Supreme Court's decision in Electro-Craft Corp. v. Controlled Motion, Inc., 332 N.W.2d 890 (Minn. 1983), a case that also involved information taken by former employees and used in starting a competing company. The court found that the information the employees took was not generally known or readily ascertainable in the industry. However, it found that the information did not constitute a trade secret:
(c) Reasonable efforts to maintain secrecy. It is this element upon which [plaintiff Electro-Craft Corp., or "ECC"]'s claim founders. The district court found that, even though ECC had no "meaningful security provisions," ECC showed an intention to keep its data and processes secret. This finding does not bear upon the statutory requirement that ECC use "efforts that are reasonable under the circumstances to maintain . . . secrecy." Minn. Stat. §325C.01, subd. 5(ii). . . . [E]ven under the common law, more than an "intention" was required - the plaintiff was required to show that it had manifested that intention by making some effort to keep the information secret.

This element of trade secret law does not require maintenance of absolute secrecy; only partial or qualified secrecy has been required under the common law. What is actually required is conduct which will allow a court acting in equity to enforce plaintiff's rights. . . .

In the present case, even viewing the evidence most favorably to the findings below, we hold that ECC did not meet its burden of proving that it used reasonable efforts to maintain secrecy as to [the subject matter of the suit, a product called the ECC 1125]. We acknowledge that ECC took minimal precautions in screening its Handbook and publications for confidential information and by requiring some of its employees to sign a confidentiality agreement, but these were not enough.

First, ECC's physical security measures did not demonstrate any effort to maintain secrecy. By "security" we mean the protection of information from discovery by outsiders. Security was lax in this case. For example, the main plant had a few guarded entrances, but seven unlocked entrances existed without signs warning of limited access. Employees were at one time required to wear badges, but that system was abandoned by the time of the events giving rise to this case. The same was generally true of the Amery, Wisconsin plant where ECC 1125 and brushless motors were manufactured. One sign was posted at each plant, however, marking the research and development lab at Hopkins and the machine shop at Amery as restricted to "authorized personnel." Discarded drawings and plans for motors were simply thrown away, not destroyed. Documents such as motor drawings were not kept in a central or locked location, although some design notebooks were kept locked.

The relaxed security by itself, however, does not preclude a finding of reasonable efforts by ECC to maintain secrecy. Other evidence did not indicate that industrial espionage is a major problem in the servo motor industry. Therefore, "security" measures may not have been needed, and the trial court could have found trade secrets if ECC had taken other reasonable measures to preserve secrecy.

However, ECC's "confidentiality" procedures were also fatally lax, and the district court was clearly in error in finding ECC's efforts to be reasonable. By "confidentiality" in this case we mean the procedures by which the employer signals to its employees and to others that certain information is secret and should not be disclosed. Confidentiality was important in this case, for testimony demonstrated that employees in the servo motor business frequently leave their employers in order to produce similar or identical devices for new employers. ECC has hired many employees from other corporations manufacturing similar products. ^[16] If ECC wanted to prevent its employees from doing the same thing, it had an obligation to inform its employees that certain information was secret.

ECC's efforts were especially inadequate because of the non-intuitive nature of ECC's claimed secrets here. The dimensions, etc., of ECC's motors are not trade secrets in as obvious a way as a "secret formula" might be. ECC should have let its employees know in no uncertain terms that those features were secret.

Instead, ECC treated its information as if it were not secret. None of its technical documents were marked "Confidential," and drawings, dimensions and parts were sent to customers and vendors without special marking. Employee access to documents was not restricted. ECC never issued a policy statement outlining what it considered secret. Many informal tours were given to vendors and customers without warnings as to confidential information. Further, two plants each had an "open house" at which the public was invited to observe manufacturing processes. . . .

In summary, ECC has not met its burden of proof in establishing the existence of any trade secrets. The evidence does not show that ECC was ever consistent in treating the information here as secret.
Given that the information in question was not in fact known at all outside ECC, why shouldn't ECC be able to prevent its employees from using the information they acquired there? Should the laxity of ECC's precautions matter if no one other than the defendants, in fact, took advantage of it?
2. There is an intuitive relationship between the existence of a secret and reasonable efforts to protect a secret. After all, if something is not a secret, there would not seem to be any point to protecting it. And the fact that an idea is well protected may be evidence that it is, in fact, a secret. Nonetheless, the requirements are conceptually distinct. Information in the public domain cannot be turned into a secret merely by treating it as a secret. This distinction is made clear in the UTSA, which defines a trade secret as information that is both "not generally known" and the subject of reasonable efforts to maintain secrecy. UTSA §1(4).

Consider whether the opinion in Rockwell conflates these two into a single requirement. The court seems to emphasize the evidentiary significance of the precautions Rockwell took in proving misappropriation. Since it was clear (to the court, at least) that the DEV employees did, in fact, take the information from Rockwell, the court did not consider the precautions to be that important.
3. In Rockwell, the court apparently assumed that the manufacturer was in a confidential relationship with the subcontractors to which it sent drawings. Is it reasonable to assume that there was an implied confidential relationship in the absence of an express agreement? Cf. Pauwels v. Deloitte LLP, 83 F.4th 171, 182-83 (2d Cir. 2023) (finding that oral confidentiality agreements with some recipients of alleged trade secrets were insufficient to protect secrets where the information was disclosed to others without similar assurances, where the scope of the oral agreements was unclear, and where the disclosures were not password protected).
4. How much effort should be required of trade secret owners? Obviously, the best way to protect a secret is not to tell anyone at all. In the modern commercial world, however, this is normally impractical. Companies with trade secrets must tell the secret to their employees, their business partners, and often their distributors and customers as well. But the risk of inadvertent use or disclosure can be reduced in a number of ways: for example, by requiring employees, licensees, and even customers to sign confidentiality agreements; by investing in physical security measures against theft, such as fences, safes, and guards; and by designing products themselves so that they do not reveal their secrets upon casual (or even detailed) inspection. The First Circuit has held that "affirmative steps" to protect secrecy, not merely "ordinary discretion," are required. See Incase Inc. v. Timex Corp., 488 F.3d 46 (1st Cir. 2007).
5. Rationale/Justification for Reasonable Precautions. If the idea is to encourage investment in trade secrets, why require any degree of "reasonable precautions" at all? One sometimes hears in this regard that all "fencing" expenditures are inefficient. Cf.
Edmund W. Kitch, The Law and Economics of Rights in Valuable Information, 9 J. Legal Stud. 683 (1980) (arguing that reasonable precautions make sense only as evidence of the existence of a trade secret). Why not simply require explicit noticelarge neon signs, stamps on all documents, or publication of a secrecy policy-in place of physical precautions?

Are prospective trade secret thieves actually encouraged by the reasonable precautions argument to steal ideas when they observe a lapse in security, and does this rule give them an incentive to search out such lapses? Professor Kitch asks the related question of why these expenses should be required in addition to the expense of bringing a trade secret lawsuit. Some scholars contend that a trade secret cause of action which yields a legal remedy ought to be available when it is cheaper than the physical precautions that would be necessary to protect a piece of information. See David Friedman, William Landes \& Richard Posner, Some Economics of Trade Secret Law, 5 J. ECON. PERSPECTIVES 61, 67 (1991). They note further that where "the social costs of enforcing secrecy through the legal system would be high, the benefits of shared information are likely to exceed the net benefits of legal protection."

What value is there in a legal rule that requires investment in precautions up to the level that would be rational in the absence of the legal rule? Should it be a defense to a trade secret action that the plaintiff could more easily have protected the secret through physical precautions?

Professor Kitch notes by way of analogy that we do not prohibit criminal complaints for larceny just because a property owner was careless. (On the other hand, many states reduce recovery in tort suits for "comparative negligence.") He also suggests that reasonable precautions are required only to put prospective infringers on notice about the existence of a right and to serve as evidence of the fact that the secret is worth protecting legally. The fencing thus serves a notice function, akin to "marking" products with patent numbers, copyright symbols, or trademark symbols. Kitch, supra, at 698.

The Court in duPont \& Co. v. Christopher, 431 F.2d 1012 (5th Cir. 1970), pays significant attention to the role of fencing costs in trade secrets suits. We will return to that case when we consider misappropriation of trade secrets. See Section C.

The reasonable precautions requirement arguably serves to weed out frivolous trade secret claims by requiring evidence of investment by the plaintiff in protecting the secret.
6. Will general precautions suffice, or must the reasonable efforts be specific to the secrets in question? In Taylor Made Express Inc. v. Kidd, 2024 WL 197231 (N.D. Ill. Jan. 18, 2024), the court found that a broad and vague provision in an employee handbook prohibiting disclosure of confidential information was not sufficient effort where the plaintiffs took a "laissez-faire approach to data security" and did not call out the specific secrets that employees were to keep confidential.

Will reasonable precautions always be a question of fact? Or are certain activities (publishing a secret formula, for example) so inconsistent with trade secret protection that they automatically preclude a successful trade secret suit? See Section II(B)(3) (discussing disclosure of trade secrets).

# PROBLEMS 

Problem II-6. Smith, a bar owner in rural Alabama, develops by accident one night the relatively simple formula for a new alcoholic beverage. The drink is simply a mixture of three common ingredients. Smith begins selling the drink, which he calls "Mobile Mud," in his bar. However, he instructs his bartenders not to reveal the formula to anyone and has them premix "Mud" in the back of the bar, out of sight of customers. Smith is outraged when he learns that Jimmy Dean, an international distributor of alcoholic beverages, has copied his formula and is marketing it under a different name. At trial, Dean employees and independent experts unanimously testify that it is possible for someone with experience in the beverage industry to determine the formula for Mud by looking at, smelling and tasting the drink.

Has Smith taken reasonable precautions? What more could he have done to protect the "secret formula" of Mobile Mud? Is the secret so obvious to consumers that selling the product on the open market destroys protection? Does your opinion of the case change if you learn that Dean's representative went to Smith's bar and bribed a bartender to disclose the formula?

Problem II-7. MidContinent is a small manufacturer of signs and decals. It has only five employees, two of whom are father and son and two more of whom are family friends. The company describes itself as having a "relaxed, congenial" working atmosphere. In order to avoid what the president considers excessive formality, the employees have never been required to sign confidentiality agreements, and documents kept within the company aren't stamped confidential. The company has never conducted "exit interviews" or instructed its employees about trade secrecy. According to the company president, "we trust our employees, and that trust has never been misplaced." On the other hand, the company does take certain steps to keep outsiders from accessing its customer lists and its adhesive manufacturing process. And there is little history of economic espionage in the decal-manufacturing business. Has MidContinent taken reasonable efforts to protect its secrets? Should it matter whether the party accused of stealing those secrets is an employee or an outsider?

## 3. Reasonable Efforts to Maintain Secrecy

It is axiomatic that public disclosure of a trade secret destroys the "secret," and therefore ends protection. The corollary to this rule is that as long as a trade secret remains secret, it is protectable. Thus, trade secrets do not last for a specific term of years but continue indefinitely until the occurrence of a particular event-the public disclosure of the secret. Disclosure of a once-protected trade secret can occur in several ways.
# i. Voluntary Disclosure by the Trade Secret Owner 

When a trade secret owner publishes the secret, whether in an academic journal or any other public forum, secrecy is lost so long as the publication is accessible to those interested in the subject matter. This loss might reasonably be considered a substantial disincentive to publication of scientific or technical advances. But publication of secret information regularly occurs, either because inventors have not thought through the consequences of their actions or because the value or prestige of first publication is deemed to outweigh the potential loss of commercial trade secret protection.

One common form of disclosure is the publication of an issued patent. Because (as we shall see) patent law requires the public disclosure of an invention with sufficient specificity to enable one of ordinary skill in the art to make it, obtaining a patent on an invention destroys trade secret protection. See Tewari De-Ox Sys. v. Mountain States, 637 F.3d 604 (5th Cir. 2011); Ferroline Corp. v. General Aniline \& Film Corp., 207 F.2d 912 (7th Cir. 1953). Thus, an inventor must "elect" either patent or trade secret protection, for the two cannot protect the same invention simultaneously.

The Federal Circuit applied a notable exception to this seemingly absolute rule in Rhone-Poulenc Agro v. DeKalb Genetics Corp., 272 F.3d 1335 (Fed. Cir. 2001). In that case, the defendant had stolen the plaintiff's trade secrets and published them in its own patent application. The court concluded that the trade secret owner never had the opportunity to "elect" to give up trade secret protection, and so ruled that the publication of the defendant's patent had not disclosed plaintiff's trade secrets. This result seems equitable to the inventor. But does it really comport with the principle that information must be secret to be protected? For a contrary rule, see Evans v. General Motors, 125 F.3d 1448 (Fed. Cir. 1997) (holding that publication by a thief started the one-year clock running for patenting an invention, and reasoning that because the trade secret owner knew of the theft he could have acted to seek patent protection within a reasonable time period).

What about patent applications? Until 1999, patent applications were kept secret by the U.S. Patent Office unless and until the patent issued. If a patent application was not actively prosecuted, or if the patent did not issue, it was declared abandoned by the Patent Office. See 37 C.F.R. §1.114 (1995). Abandoned applications were not available to the public. In fact, the application itself was destroyed after 20 years.

In 1999, Congress changed U.S. law to require that some (but not all) patent applications be published after 18 months. See 35 U.S.C. §122. Since it takes approximately three years on average for a patent to issue, many applicants face an election not between patent and trade secret protection, but between the prospect of future patent protection and trade secret protection.

The notion of an "election" between trade secret and patent protection assumes that the patent application actually describes all the details of an invention. For more on this issue-known as the "enablement" requirement in patent law-see 35 U.S.C. §112, discussed in Chapter III(B)(4)(i). Some firms pursue patent protection in a way that withholds valuable know-how from the public. See Peter S. Menell \& Michael J.
Meurer, Notice Failure and Notice Externalities, 5 J. LeGAL ANALYSIS 1, 32-34 (2013) (noting that the quality of patent disclosure varies widely); Henry Petroski, The PENCIL 114- 15 (1990) (describing how the family of Henry David Thoreau kept its pencil-making technology secret rather than disclose it by obtaining a patent). For example, in Life Spine, Inc. v. Aegis Spine, Inc., 8 F.4th 531 (7th Cir. 2021), the court held that plaintiff had a protectable trade secret in the exact dimensions of a patented spinal implant device because the patent did not disclose those dimensions.

# ii. Distributing a Product that Embodies the Trade Secret to the Public 

Selling or distributing a product embodying a trade secret to the public may jeopardize the secret if the secret becomes readily accessible. As one court explained, both the RESTATEMENT OF TORTS and the UTSA "necessarily compel the conclusion that a trade secret is protectable only so long as it is kept secret by the party creating it. If a so-called trade secret is fully disclosed by the products produced by use of the secret then the right to protection is lost." Vacco Indus. v. Van den Berg, 6 Cal.Rptr.2d 602, 611 (Ct. App. 1992) (citations omitted). Further, disclosure may occur even without sale of the product itself, if the secret is disclosed freely and without restriction during the manufacturing or development processes.

However, sales of a product to the public do not necessarily disclose a trade secret simply because the product embodies the trade secret. Rather, the question is whether the secret is apparent from the product. Secrets that are apparent to the buyers of a product are disclosed by the product, but secrets contained in undecipherable form within the product (such as object code in a computer program) are considered secret even when the product is sold.

In Data General Corp. v. Digital Computer Controls, Inc., 297 A.2d 433 (Del. Ct. Ch. 1971), aff'd, 297 A.2d 437 (Del. S. Ct. 1972), Data General sold mainframe computers (the Nova 1200) to sophisticated business customers. Data General supplied logic drawings along with the computer to any customers who requested this information so as to enable them to repair or customize them. Digital Computer Controls acquired a Nova 1200 on the open market along with the design drawings. When it launched a business repairing and maintaining Data General Nova 1200 computers, Data General sued for misappropriation of the secrets reflected in the design drawings. The court held that Data General had not forfeited secrecy merely by selling the computers:

Defendants insist, however, that plaintiff has not maintained the degree of secrecy which will preserve its right to relief, either by publicly selling an article alleged to contain a trade secret, or by failing to restrict access to the design drawings for its device, arguing that matters of common knowledge in an industry may not be claimed as trade secrets.

It has been recognized in similar cases that even though an unpatented article, device or machine has been sold to the public, and is therefore subject to examination and copying by anyone, the manner of making the article, device or machine may yet constitute a trade secret until such a copy has in fact been made, Schulenburg v. Signatrol, Inc., 33 Ill. 2d 379, 212 N.E.2d 865, and Tabor v. Hoffman, N.Y., 118 N.Y. 30, 23 N.E. 12.

Defendants contend, however, that the issuance by plaintiff of copies of design drawings to its customers was made without safeguards designed properly to maintain the secrecy requisite to the existence of a trade secret. In other words, it is contended that plaintiff's attempts to maintain secrecy merely consisted of (1) not giving copies of the design drawings to those customers who did not need them for maintenance of their computer, (2) obtaining agreements not to disclose the information from those customers who were given copies of the drawings, and (3) printing a legend on the drawings which contained the allegedly confidential information which identified the drawing as proprietary information, the use of which was restricted. Plaintiff argues, however, that disclosure of the design drawings to purchasers of the computer is necessary properly to maintain its device, that such disclosure was required by the very nature of the machine, and that reasonable steps were taken to preserve the secrecy of the material released. I conclude at this preliminary stage of the case that it cannot be held as a matter of law that such precautions were inadequate, a factual dispute as to the adequacy of such precautions having clearly been raised. Defendants' motion for summary judgment must accordingly be denied.
Id.
Selling products that embody a secret may or may not disclose the secret. Whether it does so depends on how easy it is to discern the secret from the product. Coca-Cola can protect its secret formula even while selling millions of cans of Coke so long as buyers cannot tell what's in it. See Data General Corp. v. Grumman Systems Support Corp., 825 F.Supp. 340, 359 (D. Mass. 1993) ("Even those who obtained MV/ADEX and were able to use MV/ADEX were unable to discover its trade secrets because MV/ADEX was distributed only in its object code form, which is essentially unintelligible to humans."). By contrast, the inventor of the wheel can't protect the idea that it is round once the world can see that for themselves. As we shall see, however, customers who buy a product on the open market are entitled to break it apart to see how it works. This process is called "reverse engineering" the product. Trade secret law does not protect owners against legitimate purchasers who discover the secret through reverse engineering, absent a valid nondisclosure agreement. But while the person who does the reverse engineering is free to do what they want with the secret they discovered, the possibility that a product might be reverse engineered does not automatically foreclose any trade secret protection, even against people who have not actually reverse engineered the product.

Of what relevance is the motivation behind the disclosure of a secret? Recall that in Metallurgical Industries, the court found the fact that Metallurgical had disclosed its secrets only for profit to weigh in favor of trade secret status. Why should this be the case? On the one hand, licensing is evidence that a secret has value and is worth protecting. On the other hand, one could argue that the fact that a secret holder has sold its information for profit suggests that it is not trying to keep this information secret at all but rather is attempting to profit from its disclosure. Which of these arguments you find persuasive may depend on your view of the reasons for trade secret protection.

# iii. Public Disclosure by a Third Party 

Trade secrets may be publicly disclosed (through publication or the sale of a product) by someone other than the trade secret owner. Commonly, this occurs when someone other than the trade secret owner has independently developed or discovered the secret. Call the first trade secret "owner" A, and the independent developer B. A has no control over what B does with her independent discovery; if she chooses to publish the secret, she defeats not only her rights to trade secret protection, but A's rights as well. Suppose B did not develop the secret independently of A but in fact stole it from A. What happens if B publishes the secret? Can A still protect it? If so, what happens to C, who began using the secret after reading B's publication? This issue was addressed in Religious Technology Center v. Lerma, 908 F.Supp. 1362 (E.D. Va. 1995). In that case, the Church of Scientology sued (among others) the Washington Post, which had quoted from part of its confidential scriptures. The court concluded that the fact that the scriptures were posted on a Usenet newsgroup for ten days defeated any claim of trade secrecy:
[For ten days, the documents] remained potentially available to the millions of Internet users around the world.
As other courts who have dealt with similar issues have observed, "posting works to the Internet makes them generally known" at least to the relevant people interested in the newsgroup. Once a trade secret is posted on the Internet, it is effectively part of the public domain, impossible to retrieve. Although the person who originally posted a trade secret on the Internet may be liable for trade secret misappropriation, the party who merely downloads Internet information cannot be liable for misappropriation because there is no misconduct involved in interacting with the Internet.
908 F.Supp. at 1368; accord American Red Cross v. Palm Beach Blood Bank Inc., 143 F.3d 1407 (11th Cir. 1998) (Red Cross donor list lost trade secret status because it was posted on a publicly accessible computer bulletin board). But see Silicon Image Inc. v. Analogix Semiconductor Inc., 2008 WL 166950 (N.D. Cal. Jan. 17, 2008) (presence of information on the Internet does not destroy secrecy absent evidence that competitors knew about it).

Should the obscurity of the Web site matter? What if it is not indexed in a search engine? In DVD Copy Control Ass'n v. Bunner, 116 Cal.App.4th 241, 10 Cal.Rptr.3d 185 (Ct. App. 2004), the court found disclosure of a secret on the Internet only because it was "quickly and widely republished to an eager audience," and cautioned that it did not assume that the secrets were lost merely because they were put on the Internet.

Because of the risk of loss of trade secrecy through Internet posting, companies have been more aggressive in suing individuals who post information they consider confidential. See O'Grady v. Superior Court, 44 Cal.Rptr.3d 72 (Ct. App. 2006); Ford v. Lane, 67 F.Supp.2d 745 (E.D. Mich. 1999). In some of these cases, notably O'Grady, the company knows only that the information has been disclosed, and not who has done so. Do such lawsuits present First Amendment issues? Several defendants have asserted that they were reporting legitimate news. See Franklin B. Goldberg, Ford Motor Co. v. Lane, 16 Berkeley Tech. L.J. 271 (2001). And O'Grady held that bloggers who disclosed Apple's trade secrets were entitled to First Amendment protection as reporters, so their identity could not be disclosed by subpoena.

For an argument that disclosure on the Internet should not destroy a secret irrevocably, see Elizabeth A. Rowe, Introducing a Takedown for Trade Secrets on the Internet, 2007 Wis. L. Rev. 1042; Elizabeth A. Rowe, Saving Trade Secret Disclosures on the Internet Through Sequential Preservation, 42 WAKE FOREST L. REV. 1 (2007).

# iv. Inadvertent Disclosure 

Trade secrets may be disclosed inadvertently (for example, by being left on a train or elsewhere in public view). While the case law on this issue is sparse, it seems reasonable to argue that a truly accidental disclosure should not defeat trade secret protection if reasonable precautions have been taken. On the other hand, if the inadvertent disclosure is widespread, it would seem unfair (as well as impracticable) to require the public as a whole to "give back" the secret. Note that §1(2) (ii)(C) of the Uniform Trade Secrets Act provides that it is misappropriation for someone to disclose a secret that they have reason to know has been acquired "by accident or mistake." THE RESTATEMENT (THIRD) OF UNFAIR COMPETITION §40(~b)(4) takes the same position, "unless the [accidental] acquisition was the result of the [trade secret owner]'s failure to take reasonable precautions to maintain the secrecy of the information." See also Williams v. Curtis-Wright Corp., 681 F.2d 161 (3d Cir. 1982) (user of secrets disclosed by mistake was liable for misappropriation because he had constructive notice of the secrecy of the information). But in DVD Copy Control Ass'n v. Bunner, 116 Cal.App. 4th 241, 10 Cal.Rptr.3d 185 (Ct. App. 2004), the court rejected the idea that "once the information became publicly available everyone else would be liable under the trade secret laws simply because they knew about its unethical origins." "This," the court said, "is not what trade secret law is designed to do."

## v. Government Disclosure

Government agencies sometimes require the disclosure of trade secrets by private parties in order to serve some other social purpose. See Corn Products Refining Co. v. Eddy, 249 U.S. 427 (1919) (requiring a food manufacturer to label its product with an accurate list of ingredients). Health and environmental concerns are a very common reason for the government to require disclosure of product contents. For example, the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA), 7 U.S.C. §§136 et seq., requires disclosure of the contents of pesticides as well as a great deal of other information. FIFRA makes two concessions to trade secret protection, however. First, it limits public disclosure of information concerning manufacturing processes and inert (as opposed to active) contents. Second, it provides for compensation to be paid to the inventors of trade secrets which the government appropriates by public disclosure. See also Ruckelshaus v. Monsanto Co., 467 U.S. 986 (1984) (holding that a federal requirement that private parties disclose trade secrets may constitute a taking under the Fifth Amendment); Philip Morris Inc. v. Reilly, 312 F.3d 24 (1st Cir. 2002) (en banc) (holding that a Massachusetts law requiring labeling of cigarette ingredients was a taking of tobacco companies' trade secrets); but see Amy Kapczynski, The Public History of Trade Secrets, 55 U.C. DAVIS L. REV. 1367, 1431-35 (2022) (discussing "forgotten" cases upholding state statutes requiring the disclosure of the ingredients of "patent medicines"-proprietary nonprescription elixirs that were not the subject of utility patents and often had questionable medical benefits-and fertilizers); cf. Lyft, Inc. v. City of Seattle, 418 P.3d 102, 105 (Wash. 2018) (finding plaintiffs' zip code information likely a trade secret, but determining that it should be disclosed to the public under state Public Records Act; court did not consider the takings issue).

# COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS 

1. The plaintiff in Data General sold over 500 Nova computers to the general public. Data General provided any buyer who requested the "confidential" design drawings with a copy. Why are these drawings still considered secret? Does widespread disclosure compromise the secrecy claim at some point, even though all disclosures are made under an agreement of confidentiality? This issue often arises in the software industry. As computers have become ubiquitous, the numbers of "secret" programs in circulation may be counted in the millions rather than the hundreds. Data General implicitly concludes that even a relatively widespread disclosure to customers does not compromise the secrecy of the computer design. For cases addressing this issue in the context of computer software, compare Management Science of America v. Cyborg Sys., Inc., 1977-1 Trade Cas. (CCH) 961,472 (N.D. Ill. 1977) (holding that distribution of 600 copies of a program under a confidentiality agreement did not destroy secrecy) with Young Dental Mfg. Co. v. Q3 Special Prods., Inc., 891 F.Supp. 1345 (E.D. Mo. 1995) (characterizing as "completely frivolous" plaintiff's claim that its publicly sold software was a trade secret).

A closely related question involves attempts by the owners of information to "contract around" the requirement of secrecy. If the parties agree to treat a piece of information as secret, is the licensee bound not to use or disclose the information under contract principles regardless of whether or not it is in fact in the public domain? This issue is a recurring one in intellectual property law, and a problem that has never adequately been addressed. Under what circumstances does the sale of a commercial product embodying a trade secret destroy the secret? Is the answer different for a commercially available product produced by a secret manufacturing process? In this regard, computer software may present a special case. While a particular computer program may be widely distributed, in fact all that is sold to the consumer is a disk containing object code. Object code is virtually impossible for humans to read without machine assistance. ^5 Because of this, computer software is in some sense unlike a physical product whose design is evident to the casual observer. Even after it is publicly distributed, object code is meaningless to the casual observer. Only a complex process of reverse engineering (sometimes called "disassembly" or "decompilation") can enable the user to decipher the source code that was originally written for the program.

Should it matter that a computer program is distributed only in object code form? Consider the following case, in which the defendant was accused of misappropriating a computer program in object code form:

The source code can and does qualify as a trade secret. . . .
Whether the object code is a trade secret is a more difficult question. ^[7] Atkinson first contends that the object code cannot be a trade secret because it does not derive independent economic value from its secrecy, and therefore fails the first definitional requirement of a trade secret. This argument has no merit. Trandes generates most of its revenues by providing computer services. . . . Armed with a copy of the object code, an individual would have the means to offer much the same engineering services as Trandes. . . .

Atkinson next argues that the object code cannot be a trade secret because Trandes did not keep it secret . . . Atkinson asserts that the Tunnel System has been widely disclosed as a mass-marketed product and that its existence and its abilities are not secret. [The court concluded that the object code remained secret because it had only been distributed to two customers, and both of them signed licenses agreeing to keep the program a secret.]
Trandes Corp. v. Guy F. Atkinson Co., 996 F.2d 655, 663-64 (4th Cir. 1993). Consider the court's footnote. Can object code be a trade secret if it can easily be duplicated (whether or not the copier understands what he is copying)? Is the plaintiff in this case really trying to leverage copyright protection out of a trade secret claim? In many cases, the alleged trade secret at issue is not the source or object code of the computer program itself but certain high-level design features of the program (its "architecture"). See Integrated Cash Management Services, Inc. v. Digital Transactions, Inc., 920 F.2d 171, 173 (2d Cir. 1990). Suppose that, rather than using what they had learned of the architecture of the program while employed by the company, ICM's former employees had copied the object code of the program altogether. (Leave aside for a moment questions of copyright infringement, and consider only the trade secret issue.) Would they be liable for misappropriating the trade secrets contained in the program ^[7] This case presents an unusual set of facts. In the ordinary case, the owner of trade secret computer software will maintain the secrecy of the source code but freely distribute the object code. See, e.g., Q-Co Indus. v. Hoffman, 625 F.Supp. 608, 617 (S.D.N.Y. 1985) (program secret where source code secret, even though object code not secret). In such cases, the owner of the software cannot claim trade secret protection for the object code because its disclosure to the public destroyed its secrecy. In this case, however, Trandes maintained the secrecy of the source code and the object code, as we explain below.
architecture on the grounds that copying the program in its entirety necessarily copied the architecture? Or would the fact that the object code was publicly disclosed protect them from liability? See Silvaco Data Sys. v. Intel Corp., 109 Cal.Rptr. 3d 27 (Cal. Ct. App. 2010) (holding that one "does not, by executing machine-readable software, 'use' the underlying source code; nor does one acquire the requisite knowledge of any trade secrets embodied in that code."); Beacon Wireless Solutions Inc. v. Garmin Int'l, 894 F.Supp.2d 727 (W.D. Va. 2012). How would the courts in Trandes and the Data General cases answer this question? Does the answer suggest a problem with relying on trade secrecy to protect computer programs?
2. To what extent does the incorporation of a secret in a public governmental record preclude trade secret protection? See Frazee v. U.S. Forest Service, 97 F.3d 367 (9th Cir. 1996) (information was not a trade secret because it could be obtained from the government under the Freedom of Information Act); Weygand v. CBS, Inc., 43 U.S.P.Q.2d 1120 (C.D. Cal. 1997) (depositing a work with the U.S. Copyright Office destroys trade secrecy).
3. Can a trade secret ever be abandoned by its owner through non-use? See Camilla Hrdy \& Mark A. Lemley, Abandoning Trade Secrets, 73 Stan. L. Rev. 1 (2021) (arguing that unused secrets should be treated as abandoned, allowing others to use them).


^[16] One ECC employee actually prided himself on the information he had brought with him from his former employer. One day, just before that employee left ECC to join another company, the president of ECC found him copying documents after hours. ECC never questioned the employee or warned him or his new employer that certain information was confidential.
^5 It is possible to "reverse engineer" object code in some cases to create a kind of rough estimate of what must have been in the original source code. The process, however, is demanding and time consuming even for expert programmers.