
The corporate law rules discussed to this point apply to all corporations, whether publicly held or owned by just a few shareholders. But a number of important differences dramatically affect the governance of publicly held corporations and influence the relative roles of law and private ordering in that setting. This section will focus on two of these characteristics: the presence of a market for shares and federal regulation by the Securities and Exchange Commission to protect stockholders' investment and governance rights.

## a. The Market for Shares and the Efficient Market Hypothesis

When a corporation reaches certain minimal levels of outstanding shares and net worth, its shares can be traded in a regional or national securities market. Corporations with such characteristics will generate sufficient trading volume to justify a centralized matching of buyers and sellers - the essence of a securities market. Securities markets provide three important services to publicly traded corporations and their shareholders. Two of these, liquidity and valuation, go hand in hand. The third service, the monitoring of managers, is closely related.

To understand the liquidity and valuation functions of securities markets, consider how private residences are sold. Unlike shares, private residences are unique. Bringing buyers and sellers together involves significant transaction costs. First, potential buyers must investigate a residence to see whether it fits their needs. Second, they must determine a fair price.
Securities markets reduce this type of transaction cost to near zero. As discussed at the beginning of this chapter, all publicly traded common shares have nearly identical legal characteristics, thereby eliminating the need for ordinary investors to incur legal costs to ascertain the rights attached to any particular corporation's shares. In addition, the competition between and among informed buyers and sellers means that there is a reliable market price for each share of stock, also eliminating ordinary shareholders' need to incur research costs. Thus, efficient securities markets ensure that shareholders have ongoing, free information as to the current value of their shares. Moreover, markets provide near costless liquidity, giving shareholders the ability to sell their shares at any time, for whatever purpose, without paying substantial broker's fees.

Securities markets' liquidity and valuation functions have a significant impact on corporate governance. First, the securities markets serve as a quasi-monitor of the corporation's managers. If the corporation is being poorly managed, or if its assets would have significantly greater value in some different use, a new management team may seek to acquire a majority of the corporation's shares and then replace management. This possibility of corporate takeover (see Chapters 6 and 7) motivates managers to operate the corporation efficiently and with a view to maximizing share value. As a result, shareholders can avoid the cost, or lessen their reliance on other means of monitoring or disciplining management (e.g., through litigation, voting, or direct participation in management).

# (1) PHYSICAL AND ELECTRONIC MARKETS FOR SHARES 

Centralized trading of shares, once characterized by physical trading on the floor of a traditional stock exchange, now mostly occurs electronically as market makers post prices at which they will buy or sell securities. There have been two major markets for stock in the United States, the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) and Nasdaq, with others around the world, but additional trading platforms have grown up with new technology.

A major worry of any stock trading system is the possibility of wide swings in pricing when trading is too thin or customers are panicking. To lessen price volatility, the traditional stock exchanges used specialists in each listed stock to coordinate all transactions in their assigned stocks (the NYSE still uses designated market makers in a market that relies mostly on electronic trading). Whenever there is a significant disparity between the number of persons wishing to buy or sell a stock, the specialist would step in and use its own funds to be the missing buyer or seller. Electronic trading offers increased possibilities for individual traders to buy and sell without intermediaries, but it has also led to markets driven by high-speed trading done by computer programs and "dark pools" where traders seek to find venues not dominated by those strategies. Technological advances have also contributed to globalization of securities trading.

## (2) THE EFFICIENT MARKET HYPOTHESIS

Clearly, national market systems are an invaluable resource for publicly traded corporations. Shareholders' confidence in these markets makes it possible for corporations to raise huge amounts of capital from investors. Think about your own willingness to invest in stock. Would you feel the need to do research on a particular NYSE-traded stock to be sure that the trading price is "fair"? And as the quoted price of a stock you own changes from day to day in the weeks and months after you purchase it, would you be concerned that you should continuously research the company whose stock you purchased? The more confidence you have that the traded stock price reflects a fair price, the more willing you will be to purchase stock, and the higher the price you will pay relative to other investments that carry higher research costs and more uncertainty as to value. Moreover, both you and lawmakers will feel less need for costly laws and regulations to ensure that prices are fair.

In the last several decades, economists have asserted that our stock exchanges and alternative trading markets provide unbiased prices. If this is so, investors can purchase or sell stocks for the prevailing quoted price without the concern that home buyers have - that the quoted price is not fair but instead represents the seller's personal biases or irrational beliefs concerning the value of her home.

Economists arrived at this belief by empirically testing stock market efficiency. The first step was to test the claim that stock prices move in a "random walk." Prices move randomly if past prices give no information as to what prices will be in the future. Consider the analogous problem of determining whether a coin will come up heads or tails based on what the last coin flip produced. You cannot systematically chart the results of past coin flips and learn from the pattern whether the next flip is more likely to be heads or tails. The next flip result is totally random. Likewise, if stock prices move randomly, then you cannot learn from studying past prices whether the next price change is more likely to be up or down.

In the 1960s, economists asserted that they had empirically proved that stock prices do move in a random walk. This debate is often presented in the form of a hypothesis, the Efficient Market Hypothesis (EMH), which can be tested. The weakest form of the EMH posits that you cannot develop a trading strategy based on the use of past prices that will enable you to beat the market return. If there were information from past prices that had not yet been incorporated into the price by the market, you could trade based on such a strategy (e.g., buy when stock has gone down for two days and back up for one), but studies over time have not revealed such winnable strategies. In essence, the current market price is unbiased in that it has already incorporated the value of information from past prices, and whatever causes the price to move tomorrow will be because of new information.

Economists then set about testing two stronger forms of the EMH. The so-called semi-strong-form hypothesis asserts that you cannot develop a trading strategy that will beat the market by using publicly available information relevant to the value of traded stocks (e.g., an announcement about earnings or a change in dividends). The market will be efficient in incorporating such information before you can effectively trade on it. The strong-form hypothesis tests an even stronger claim, that even if your trading strategy were based on nonpublic information, you would not be able to beat the market.

In simplified form, this is how trading might look if the strong-form hypothesis were true. At 10 A.m. on Tuesday, Coca-Cola stock is trading for $40 per share. At that moment, Coca-Cola issues a press release announcing the results of an interim accounting report revealing a fact previously unknown to the investing public-that Coca-Cola will earn 75 cents per share more in the third quarter of its fiscal year than previously estimated. Although you might expect that this favorable fact will immediately cause a price increase in the stock as investors rush to capitalize upon previously unknown information, in a strong-form efficient market the price of Coca-Cola stock will remain constant because the market would have already taken the information into account before it was announced. Although there is evidence that markets can be strong-form efficient in certain circumstances, there has never been widespread belief that our markets are strong-form efficient in all circumstances. This means that individuals who possess "inside," nonpublic information can make a profit by trading on that information. And this explains, as we will see in Chapter 12, why trading on undisclosed "inside" information is prohibited by federal securities law.

Returning to our Coca-Cola hypothetical, in a semi-strong-form efficient market, the market behaves essentially as you might expect. Assume again that at 10 A.m. on Tuesday, Coca-Cola stock is trading for $40 per share. At that moment, Coca-Cola issues a press release announcing the results of an interim accounting report revealing a fact previously unknown to the investing public-that Coca-Cola will earn 75 cents per share more in the third quarter of its fiscal year than previously estimated. By 10:05 A.m., the stock of Coca-Cola rises $2 per share, reflecting this previously unknown fact. If you buy stock at 10:05 A.m. just after learning about the new earnings report, you are buying at a price that reflects the value of Coca-Cola stock given all available public information, including the new earnings forecast.

How can markets assimilate and reflect new information so rapidly? The common explanation is the existence of a large number of sophisticated market investors who trade for their own account or for the investors they represent. These professionals track all sources of information affecting the value of stock and act instantaneously to capture the "profit" available by buying stock at the "old" fair price. In our Coca-Cola example, market professionals buy stock beginning at 10:01 A.m. for $40 per share and continue buying until the stock reaches its "new" fair value, representing the new equilibrium price at which the number of willing buyers and sellers is identical.

Financial economists think about market efficiency not as an on-off switch but as degrees of efficiency. The general acceptance that our securities markets are at least semi-strong-form efficient, as illustrated in the foregoing example, has affected the laws governing corporations. The Securities and Exchange Commission has expressly relied on that belief to make major changes in its regulation of our securities markets, and the Supreme Court has relied on it as a factor in determining "reliance" in securities fraud cases. Additionally, some scholars and courts have asserted that shareholders should not be able to bring lawsuits for damages that result from mistaken decisions made by a corporation's management. Since the skill and diligence of a corporation's officers and directors are largely observable by stock analysts, the positive or negative effect of those attributes on the value of a corporation's stock is presumably accurately and instantaneously reflected in the price of that stock. Since shareholders buy stock at a price reflecting the skills of the corporation's management team, they have already been compensated by a discounted share price if they buy stock in a corporation with subpar managers.
If markets meet the criteria to be considered semi-strong-form efficient, then a risk-averse investor planning to invest in stocks is smart to put her money in a mutual fund that perfectly duplicates the makeup of the market in which she wishes to invest. So, if the target market is the NYSE, the investor should put her money in a mutual fund that replicates the makeup of that exchange. She will then obtain the average gain or loss that the NYSE-traded stocks experience as a whole. If she tries to "beat the market" by buying only those stocks that she or her investment advisor believe will "outperform" the market, she has a 50 percent chance of guessing right and a 50 percent chance of guessing wrong. If she pays her investment advisor to help her make that guess, then she is doomed on average to have a lower net return by the amount she has paid her advisor.

Another way of putting this is to describe stock analysts as "dart throwers." By the time they can tell you about any stock that they believe is undervalued, the market will have that information and there will be no "profit" left to be made by buying the recommended stock. The Wall Street Journal tested this proposition for more than a decade with an entertaining feature.

In 1988, the Wall Street Journal began a contest. Periodically, the Journal staff would invite four professional money managers to select the stocks they thought would do best in the coming months. Then the staff would repair to a nearby tavern, pin a page from the stock quotes section to the wall, and throw darts to select their own portfolio. At the end of each contest period, the Journal would announce who had done better, the pros or the darts. In the first round, the hands-down winner of this "Investment Dartboard" contest was: the darts.

This result came as no surprise to either finance theorists or their hangers-on. After all, we had all studied from that bible of modern financial theory, Brealey and Myers' Principles of Corporate Finance. We knew that decades of scholarship had definitively proven the Efficient Capital Markets Hypothesis (ECMH), a keystone theory of modern finance that predicts that market prices are "informationally efficient" (i.e., respond to new information almost instantaneously)....Thus the Investment Dartboard results only confirmed what the academics already knew: you can't beat the market.

Or so it seemed from the first round. Undeterred by their initial defeat, investment managers continued to step up to the plate in subsequent Investment Dartboard contests. And as the contest continued, it soon became apparent that while the pros sometimes lost, more often they won. The Journal has now run the Investment Dartboard contest for over eight years, and over that time a clear pattern has emerged: although the darts frequently give the pros a drubbing, on average the pros are beating both the darts and the market. Indeed, as of October 1996, the pro's portfolios had produced average annual gains of 20.6%, compared to 11.2% for the darts, and 11.6% for the Dow Jones Industrial Average.

Lynn Stout, How Efficient Markets Undervalue Stocks: CAPM and ECMH Under Conditions of Uncertainty and Disagreement, 19 Cardozo L. Rev. 475, 477 (1997).

What can explain this empirical phenomenon? What can explain the stock market crash of 1987, in which the market lost nearly 25 percent of its value in one day? What can explain the Nasdaq bubble and its crash in 2001, or the subsequent reflation of stock prices followed by the stunning market losses in 2008? What does it mean to say that our national stock markets are semi-strong-form efficient if overall values can vary so dramatically over a relatively short time? Do these phenomena suggest that market prices do not accurately reflect what a rational buyer or seller should be willing to pay for a particular stock, and if so, why? Do they suggest that the markets are, in fact, not as efficient as economists have asserted and courts and policy makers have believed? Even if markets are unbiased in terms of being semi-strong-form efficient (in what is called informational efficiency), that does not mean that prices will be fundamentally efficient in terms of correctly valuing an entire class of assets.

An important piece of this puzzle may lie in the growing understanding that rational traders do not always determine stock prices in the way contemplated by the EMH. Developing fields of behavioral economics and cognitive psychology provide alternative explanations to complete rational economic behavior. One example is a process by which markets could be dominated not by rational traders, but instead by so-called noise traders. Noise traders are persons who have systematic cognitive biases that prevent rational assessment of the value of available information, leading to purchase and sale decisions being made on factors - background noise - that are irrationally treated as valuable information by the trader. Noise traders force prices away from the price that available information rationally suggests is ideal, creating profit opportunities for rational traders to step in and purchase or sell until the market again comes in line with available information. However, rational traders might occasionally "ride the wave" of irrationality, hoping to get out with big profits before the market realizes that the current price is irrationally high or low. The combination of noise traders occasionally dominating the market and rational traders riding the wave could explain large one-day shifts in market prices, when no real changes in available information are apparent.

There are a number of other theories that are increasing our understanding of the conditions under which markets may, either momentarily or for long periods of time, fail to rationally reflect all available public information. However, for our purposes in this course, it is enough to understand the basic theory of efficient markets and its limits, and to know that lawmakers, regulators, and many investors sometimes base investment, regulatory policy, and judicial decisions on the belief that our markets are generally semi-strong-form efficient.

# PROBLEM 3-10 

Nanette is in charge of investment decisions for RRIP, a large state pension fund. RRIP has been steadily increasing its investment in Argona, Inc., a corporation that manufactures and sells Internet upgrade kits to corporate clients. Argona's shares are traded over Nasdaq and the average daily trading volume is approximately 10,000 shares. RRIP owns 60,000 Argona shares, representing 6 percent of the outstanding stock. Nanette learns from her brother, a computer scientist, that a start-up company, Surf, Inc., is beta testing a product that may well devastate Argona's market for upgrade kits. Nanette was already concerned about RRIP's investment in Argona because the market price has dropped 25 percent in the last two weeks. Assuming Nanette believes that the information is reliable, or confirms it to her satisfaction, should she sell RRIP's Argona shares immediately?
# b. Federal Regulation of Publicly Held Companies 

Securities Exchange Act of $1934 \S \S 12(\mathrm{~b}), 12(\mathrm{~g}), 13(\mathrm{a}), 14(\mathrm{a}), 14(\mathrm{~d}), 14 \mathrm{~A}$ 1934 Exchange Act Rules 14a-3, 14a-4, 14a-8, 14a-9;
Schedule S-K; Forms 10-K, 10-Q, 8-K The larger impact that publicly held corporations have on our economy has generated periodic calls for different and additional regulation of these corporations. These pleas usually are addressed to Congress and raise the policy question of the extent to which corporate governance should be a federal or state function. These issues have been debated for more than a century, particularly during the time of Theodore Roosevelt's trust-busting at the beginning of the twentieth century, during the New Deal after the Great Depression, and most recently at the beginning of the twenty-first century in the wake of the Enron and WorldCom scandals and the financial meltdown in 2007-2008. At none of these times did the federal government choose to pass a federal incorporation statute that would have taken from the states the power to create corporations and/or federalized the rules that we have studied to this point.

Beginning with the New Deal legislation, Congress did choose to supplement the existing state regulatory regime by creating the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and empowering it to (1) regulate the stock market and securities trading industry, and (2) provide largely procedural protections for shareholder governance rights created by state law and private ordering. In both these roles, the SEC is directly or indirectly regulating the conduct of publicly held corporations.

## (1) THE SEC'S ROLE IN PROTECTING STOCKHOLDERS' INVESTMENT EXPECTATIONS

If stock markets are semi-strong-form efficient, quickly embedding all publicly available information about a particular company and its stock, are those markets fair? What is to keep insiders from trading on and manipulating the availability of information that, if known, would change investors' beliefs as to a corporation's value? What ensures that new information about a corporation's value is properly and fairly disseminated by corporate managers? What ensures that market professionals and the markets themselves will operate in the best interests of shareholders and other security holders? A primary answer to each of these questions is the SEC and the rules and regulations that it administers.

The SEC was created in 1934, following the stock market crash of 1929 and as part of a New Deal regulatory framework aimed at addressing the problems that emerged from the growth of industrial corporations financed by a new class of ordinary investors. State corporation law failed to keep abreast of the growth of these corporations, necessitating a larger federal role in protecting investors and controlling corporate misconduct. More specifically, the Securities Act of 1933 and the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (the latter of which created the SEC) required extensive corporate disclosure to investors under the theory that "sunlight is the best disinfectant." This philosophy, rather than the governance focus of state corporations' statutes, governs the SEC's role to this day.
Indeed, as a former SEC Commissioner once explained, "The SEC is first and foremost a disclosure agency. . . .The underlying premise of the Commission's disclosure regime is that if investors have the appropriate information, they can make rational and informed investment decisions." Daniel M. Gallagher, The Importance of the SEC Disclosure Regime, Harv. L. Sch. F. on Corp. Governance (July 16, 2023). This disclosure mandate is embodied in both statutes. First, when a company goes "public" (which refers to a private company's initial public offering or "IPO" to sell shares to the public), it must follow detailed disclosure requirements under the 1933 Securities Act, including filing a prospectus and registration statement. Second, after the IPO, the company will be subject to ongoing disclosure requirements under the 1934 Exchange Act, including the annual report (" 10-K "), the quarterly report (" 10-Q "), and the as-needed report of new information so important that disclosure must be made immediately (" 8-K "). ^1 These filings are available to the public through the SEC's EDGAR database at http://www.sec.gov.

# PROBLEM 3-11 

Search the SEC's EDGAR database for the latest 10-K of a corporation of interest to you. What does the 10-K tell you about the nature and future prospects of the corporation's business? What does it tell you about particular business risks that management foresees? What does it tell you about the management of the company? What does it tell you about the purpose of the company and its values? How does this information relate to a particular investor's decision to buy, sell, or hold the corporation's stock?

## (2) PROXY VOTING AND THE SEC'S ROLE IN PROTECTING STOCKHOLDERS' GOVERNANCE ROLE

While states usually determine the substantive law governing relations between a corporation and its shareholders, federal law plays a dominant role in regulating vote-related communication between and among shareholders and the corporation.

To begin, recall that most individual shareholders in a publicly held corporation lack sufficient incentive to invest the time and resources necessary to attend a shareholders' meeting. In fact, a core difference between individual shareholders in a publicly held corporation and those of a closely held corporation is that the bulk of the shareholders in a publicly held corporation have only a loose connection to the business, and only weak incentives to use their governance rights. In particular, dispersed shareholders face coordination costs that make their participation in governance challenging, and their incentive to do so is minimal when they own only a small stake in the company.

The proxy process has been regulated with these challenges in mind. By executing a simple agreement appointing a "proxy" to act on his behalf, a shareholder need not be physically present to participate in a meeting. Moreover, the proxy provides a means for large and sophisticated investors to collect voting power from smaller investors or each other in advance of an actual election, and thus is a valuable tool even for the active shareholder. ^2

The proxy process is heavily regulated. Federal regulation of the proxy voting process began with the enactment of the 1934 Securities Exchange Act. Section 14(a) of that Act gave the SEC authority to regulate the proxy or consent solicitation process of the shares of a corporation required to register securities with the SEC.

The legislative history suggests that Congress was primarily concerned with preventing corporations from soliciting proxies by means of materials that did not reveal the true nature of the matter being acted upon. However, the SEC has interpreted its ยง14 (a) mandate broadly. As the cases that follow show, the rules seem designed to ensure that the proxy process allows shareholders to communicate with each other and the corporation as though all of the shareholders were gathered in a large town hall on annual meeting day. Analogizing loosely, the SEC plays the role of parliamentarian for this town meeting, laying down rules for who speaks, how long they speak, and on what topics they may speak. Consistent with this broader mission, the SEC has promulgated extensive rules to address the content and timing of proxy solicitation. The following is a thumbnail sketch of those rules.

Rule 14a-3. Rule 14a-3 prohibits any proxy solicitation unless the person solicited is first furnished a publicly filed preliminary or final proxy statement containing the information specified in Schedule 14A of the Exchange Act rules. The required disclosure includes basic facts that informed voters would presumably possess. For example, regulations require that the proxy statement disclose the time, date, and place of the meeting to which the solicitation relates, the revocability of the proxy, the solicitor's identity and source of funds, and the identity of and basic information about candidates for director (if the solicitation concerns election of directors). In addition, Rule 14a-3 requires that the proxy statement sent by management in connection with proxy solicitation for the annual shareholders' meeting shall be accompanied by an annual report in prescribed form.

Rule 14a-4. Rule 14a-4 regulates the form of the proxy that solicitors ask shareholders to execute. Traditionally this proxy was often printed on a rectangular card. As a result, it has become commonplace to refer to a proxy form as a "proxy card." Electronic communication has largely replaced the printed form.

Rule 14a-8. SEC Rule 14a-8, first promulgated in 1942, provides a mechanism for shareholders to submit matters for effective consideration at any annual or special meeting. To be a "qualifying shareholder" a person must own a specified equity stake for a minimum holding period and continuously own such stock through the date of the meeting. Rule 14a-8(a) defines a "shareholder proposal" as "your recommendation or requirement that the company and/or its board of directors take action, which you intend to present at a meeting of the company's shareholders." The proposal and supporting statement may not exceed 500 words. In essence, a qualifying shareholder is making a motion at the shareholders' meeting, but is using the company's proxy material as the medium for effectively communicating their proposal to other shareholders.

Rule 14a-8 facilitates shareholders' ability to engage in persuasive communication with the directors and other shareholders as to matters that are not directly within the shareholder space for decisions. It has been used by shareholders primarily interested in reform of the corporation's corporate governance, as well as shareholders interested in broader social goals. Over the years, proponents in this latter class have used Rule 14a-8 to fight segregation and apartheid, to protect the whale and the tuna, to stop the manufacture of napalm, and to increase the number of women and minorities in the corporate workplace.

The access provided by Rule 14a-8 is subject to a number of exceptions, catalogued and explained in Rule 14a-8(i) (Question Nine). If any of these exceptions applies, then a corporation may refuse to include the submitted proposal in its proxy material. Companies that desire to exclude a shareholder proposal typically request a no-action letter from the SEC staff saying the staff will not recommend an enforcement action should the company exclude the shareholder proposal from the company proxy. If the staff declines to issue such a letter, the company usually then includes the proposal. If a no-action letter is issued, the company typically informs the proposer that the submission will be omitted and the matter usually ends there, although litigation occasionally ensues. Rule 14a-8 is examined in more detail later in this chapter.

Rule 14a-9. Rule 14a-9 is a catch-all provision designed to supplement and reinforce the specific disclosure mandates. Rule 14a-9 prohibits the making of false or misleading statements as to any material fact, or the misleading omission of a material fact, in connection with a proxy solicitation. We will study Rule 14a-9 further in Chapter 11.

# PROBLEM 3-12 

Search the SEC's EDGAR database for the latest DEF 14A (final proxy statement for annual meeting) of a corporation of interest to you. What actions are being proposed by management? What actions are being proposed by shareholders? What does the proxy statement tell you about the nature of shareholder governance in a publicly traded corporation?

[^0]: 1. Corporate reporting requirements apply to corporations that have stock traded on a national securities exchange or that have assets valued in excess of a minimum threshold. After 2012, $10 million in assets and at least 2,000 shareholders of record or at least 500 "nonaccredited" shareholders of record (i.e., the shareholders are not institutional holders or not very wealthy). Covered corporations are commonly referred to as "listed companies" or "SEC listed companies."
[^0]: 2. The term "proxy" has multiple overlapping uses, which may cause some initial confusion. Depending on the context, "proxy" may refer to (1) the legal relationship under which one party is given the power to vote the shares of another, as in "she voted her shares by proxy"; (2) the person or entity given the power to vote, as in "she acted as his proxy"; or (3) the tangible document that evidences the relationship, as in "he mailed his proxy." A proxy designation may create an agency relationship that requires the proxy holder to follow the shareholder's instruction. Alternatively, a proxy holder may be given absolute discretion to vote as he sees fit.