
Trademarks are also protected by state statute and common law as well as federal statute, although the source of constitutional authority is different from that of the Patent and Copyright Acts. Rather than deriving from a specific grant of constitutional power, federal power to regulate trademarks and unfair competition is based on the Commerce Clause, which authorizes Congress to regulate foreign and interstate commerce. Unlike patent and copyright protection, trademark law did not evolve from a desire to stimulate particular types of economic activity. Rather, its original purpose was to protect consumers from unscrupulous sellers attempting to fly under the banner of someone else's logo or identifying symbol. Trademark law has more recently embraced incentive and natural rights rationales. The Lanham Act (the federal trademark statute) protects words, symbols, and other attributes that serve to identify the nature and source of goods or services. Examples of marks protectable under the Lanham Act include corporate and product names, symbols, logos, slogans, pictures and designs, product configurations, colors, and even smells. Not all such marks are protectable, however. To receive trademark protection, a mark need not be new or previously unused, but it must represent to consumers the source of the good or service identified. It cannot be merely a description of the good itself or a generic term for the class of goods or services offered. Further, the identifying mark may not be a functional element of the product itself but must serve a purely identifying purpose. Since 1996, famous marks also receive federal protection against "dilution" by blurring or tarnishment. Finally, trademark protection is directly tied to the use of the mark to identify goods in commerce. Trademarks do not expire on any particular date but continue in force until they are "abandoned" by their owner or become unprotectable.

The PTO examines trademark applications and issues trademark registrations that confer significant benefits upon the registrants, including prima facie evidence of validity; constructive notice to others of the claim of ownership; federal subject matter jurisdiction; incontestability after five years, which confers exclusive right to use the mark; authorization to seek treble damages and attorney fees; and the right to bar importation of goods bearing the infringing mark. Federal trademark registration, however, is not necessary to obtain trademark protection. A trademark owner who believes that another is using the same or a similar mark to identify competing goods can bring suit for trademark infringement. Infringement turns on whether consumers are likely to be confused as to the origin of the goods or services. If so, the trademark owner is entitled to an injunction against the confusing use, damages for past infringement, and in some cases the seizure and destruction of infringing goods.
# PROBLEM I-2 

## MEMORANDUM

To: Associate From: Senior Partner Re: HEALTHWARE Inc.
Janet Peterson called me yesterday about a new venture that she plans to try to get off the ground. As you may know, Janet is a computer programmer and a registered nurse. She has an interesting idea for a new venture and would like our advice on how she might structure the business to have the best potential for success.

She would like to call the venture Healthcare. Janet believes that she can tap into the diet/health/environmental/mobile device craze by developing a user-friendly app that would monitor the user's diet and fitness activity. The user would input information on their health (e.g., age, weight, medical history, dietary restrictions). Each day, the program would collect information on the user's diet and physical exercise. An accelerometer built into the user's smartphone would collect exercise information. The user could manually enter their food consumption, or could use a Quick Response Code (a matrix barcode) reader to scan dietary information on a growing array of packaged and restaurant foods. The software would periodically provide an analysis of the user's health, as well as suggestions for achieving the user's goals, whether weight reduction, better fitness, or general health. In addition, the program would compile a record of the user's activities which they could bring to annual physicals. Other subroutines would be available for pregnant and lactating women, children, the elderly, diabetics, vegetarians, triathletes, etc. Over time, Healthcare would compile data from users for developing an AI-driven health, exercise, and diet predictive model for improving the software's efficacy.

Janet thinks that she could put together the diverse people necessary to pull this project off: programmers, a nutritionist, a physician, a fitness consultant. She is concerned, however, that one of these people could, after they are familiar with the product, develop a competing program.

What are the options for structuring Healthcare? What problems do you foresee in structuring this venture? Assuming that the product is popular, what are the major risks to Healthcare's success? How can we structure Healthcare so as to overcome these problems?
.
.