Alleshouse, 981 F.3d 1045 (Fed. Cir. 2020) (holding that California law barred a trailer clause); Applied Materials, Inc. v. Advanced Micro-Fabrication Equipment (Shanghai) Co., 630 F.Supp.2d 1084 (N.D. Cal. 2009) (rejecting one-year trailer clause as an invalid noncompete agreement).

Clauses of particularly long or indefinite duration can be held unenforceable even in states that enforce trailer clauses and can even run afoul of the antitrust laws. See United Shoe Machinery Co. v. La Chapelle, 212 Mass. 467, 99 N.E. 289 (1912). One court expressed the requirement of reasonableness as follows:

Hold-over clauses are simply a recognition of the fact of business life that employees sometimes carry with them to new employers inventions or ideas so related to work done for a former employer that in equity and good conscience the fruits of that work should belong to that former employer. In construing and applying hold-over clauses, the courts have held that they must be limited to reasonable times . . . and to subject matter which an employee worked on or had knowledge of during his employment . . . Unless expressly agreed otherwise, an employer has no right under a holdover clause to inventions made outside the scope of the employee's former activities, and made on and with a subsequent employer's time and funds.
Dorr-Oliver, Inc. v. United States, 432 F.2d 447, 452 (Ct. Cl. 1970). Courts are skeptical of restrictions that are broader in scope. This is particularly true of large conglomerates that attempt to require the assignment of any invention related to their (diverse) fields of business. See Ingersoll-Rand Co. v. Ciavatta, 110 N.J. 609, 542 A.2d 879, 896 n. 6 (1988).

In addition to controlling inventions made shortly after departure, employers might be able to lay claim to ideas conceived while the defendant was employed, even if those ideas aren't put into practice until years after the defendant leaves her job. See Motorola Inc. v. Lemko Corp., 2012 WL 74319 (N.D. Ill. Jan. 10, 2012) (employment agreement that required assignment of "ideas" as well as "inventions" could cover an idea developed at a former employer that wasn't turned into a patent application until five years later).

Even if an employer uses an enforceable trailer clause, there is always the risk that the former employee will simply wait out the duration of the term and then conveniently announce the discovery after the trailer clause's expiration date. Courts are sometimes called upon to evaluate the credibility of such invention dates. In General Signal Corp. v. Primary Flow Signal, Inc., the former employee asserted that his breakthrough occurred invention just five days after the expiration of the six months specified in the trailer clause:

The perfection of a flow meter proved to be a painstakingly intricate process involving extensive testing. It is therefore difficult to believe that after a long and distinguished career with Plaintiff, Mr. Halmi in his musing five days after the trailer clause expired for the first time came up with the idea for the NTV. Although the word "Eureka!" has allegedly been uttered by more than one inventor over the years, the concept at issue does not lend itself to such sudden discovery. The court finds that the concept of the ' 434 patent must have existed in Mr. Halmi's mind before his employment with GSC ended. Mr. Halmi therefore violated his agreement with GSC.
General Signal Corp. v. Primary Flow Signal, Inc., 1987 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 6929, at *10 (D.R.I. Jul. 27, 1987).

# 3. Nonsolictation Agreements 

Soliciting employees. Employers worry that departing employees will take colleagues with them. Just the publicity of a mass defection can undermine a successful business. But is it illegal? In Diodes, Inc. v. Franzen, 260 Cal. App. 2d 244, 67 Cal. Rptr. 19 (1968), the president and vice-president of Diodes left to form a competing company, called Semtech. Before they left, the officers solicited a number of Diodes employees to join them. Diodes sued the departing employees, alleging a number of claims centering on unfair competition and breach of fiduciary duty. The court dismissed the complaint, stating:

As a general principle, one who unjustifiably interferes with an advantageous business relationship to another's damage may be held liable therefor. The product is bottled under a variety of labels, including unfair competition, interference with advantageous relations, contract interference, and inducing breach of contract.

Even though the relationship between an employer and his employee is an advantageous one, no actionable wrong is committed by a competitor who solicits his competitor's employees or who hires away one or more of his competitor's employees who are not under contract, so long as the inducement to leave is not accompanied by unlawful action. In the employee situation the courts are concerned not solely with the interests of the competing employers, but also with the employee's interest. The interests of the employee in his own mobility and betterment are deemed paramount to the competitive business interests of the employers, where neither the employee nor his new employer has committed any illegal act accompanying the employment change.
67 Cal.Rptr. at 25-26 (citations omitted). See also Reeves v. Hanlon, 33 Cal.4th 1140 (2004) (a competitor who uses only lawful means to solicit at-will employees does not tortiously interfere with economic advantage). If it is legal for an employee to change jobs, why should it be illegal for someone to invite them to do so? See Orly Lobel, Talent Wants to be Free (2014) (arguing against the enforcement of nonsolicitation agreements); see also Orly Lobel, You Don't Own Me: How Mattel v. MGA Entertainment Exposed Barbie's Dark Side (2018) (telling the extraordinary story of how Mattel Corporation sought to use employment agreements and copyright law to prevent a former employee from marketing the Bratz, a sassy, bratty, multi-racial doll ensemble).

Can employers change this result by forcing their employees to sign "nonsolicitation agreements" that prevent a departing employee from soliciting other employees to join him? Drawing on the California Supreme Court's decision in Edwards v. Arthur Anderson LLP, 81 Cal.Rptr.3d 282 (2008), the California Court of Appeal held in AMN Healthcare, Inc. v. Aya Healthcare Services, Inc., 28 Cal.App.5th 923, 936-39 (2018), that the broad nonsolicitation provision of the employment agreement at issue-barring employees from either "directly or indirectly" soliciting or recruiting, or causing others to solicit or induce, any AMN employee for a period of at least one year after termination of employment with AMN-was void under CALIFORNIA BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONS CODE §16600. The court emphasized California's strong public policy of protecting the right of its citizens to pursue any lawful employment and enterprise of their choice.

Are a group of employees departing together more likely to misappropriate trade secrets? In Suzhou Angela Online Game Tech. v. Snail Games USA, 2022 WL 326725 (C.D. Cal. Jan. 31, 2022), the court inferred misappropriation from the hiring of 60 employees from the plaintiff in the course of one year.

A related issue involves "no-poach" agreements in which companies agree not to hire each other's employees. Those agreements are unlawful under the antitrust laws. In Pittsburgh Logistics Sys. v. Beemac Trucking, (Pa. April 29, 2021), the Pennsylvania Supreme Court held that a no-poach agreement could not be justified as a legitimate restraint on solicitation ancillary to an otherwise valid business agreement. For an argument that no-poach clauses are part of a broader effort to restrain the free movement of labor, see Orly Lobel, Gentlemen Prefer Bonds: How Employers Fix the Talent Market, 59 SANTA CLARA L. REV. 663 (2020).

Soliciting clients. Sometimes departing employees try to bring clients rather than co-workers with them when they leave. A common case is the departing sales representative who "takes" a list of customers (either a written list or one that they have memorized) in order to call on those customers for a competitor. ^7 Customer lists are generally protectable as trade secrets, but enjoining employees from calling on customers with whom they have had long-standing relationships raises serious concerns about employee mobility.

RESTATEMENT (THIRD) OF UNFAIR COMPETITION §41, Comment d states:
The reasonableness of an agreement that merely prohibits the use or disclosure of particular information depends primarily upon whether the information protected by the agreement qualifies as a trade secret. If the information qualifies for protection under the rule stated in §39, a contract prohibiting its use or disclosure is generally enforceable according to its terms.

Although in some cases courts have enforced nondisclosure agreements directed at information found ineligible for protection as a trade secret, many of these decisions merely reflect a more narrow definition of trade secret than that adopted in §39. However, a nondisclosure agreement that encompasses information that is generally known or in which the promisee has no protectable interest, such as a former employee's promise not to use information that is part of the employee's general skill and training (see §42, Comment d ), may be unenforceable as an unreasonable restraint of trade. Agreements that deny the promisor the right to use information that is in the public domain are ordinarily enforceable only if justified on the basis of interests other than the protection of confidential information.
Where should the line be drawn between permissible work and impermissible use of "secret" lists of customers? To whom does the value inherent in personal relationships belong?

A nonsolicitation agreement precludes sales reps from calling on customers with whom they have an existing relationship even in the absence of a trade secret. Many courts uphold these agreements, though they may restrict their scope. See ADP, LLC v. Kusins, 215 A.3d 924 (App. Div. N.J. 2019) (enforcing nonsolicitation agreement, but "blue-penciling" it to limit it to existing rather than prospective clients). Courts that have allowed agreements preventing the solicitation of customers have nonetheless made it clear that it is only affirmative solicitation of the customer that is forbidden; a departing employee does not need to cut off all contact with clients, In re Document Techs. Litig., 275 F.Supp.3d 454, 465 (S.D.N.Y. 2017), and is free to work for a former customer who approaches them. See Paramount Tax v. H\&R Block, 683 S.E.2d 141 (Ga. App. 2009); Moss, Adams \& Co. v. Shilling, 179 Cal.App.3d 124 (1986) (drawing a line between an employee announcing her departure to start a competing company and then responding to client inquiries, which is permissible, and actively soliciting old clients to follow her, which is not); Reeves v. Hanlon, 33 Cal.4th 1140 (2004) ("the UTSA does not forbid an individual from announcing a change of employment, even to clients on a protected trade secret list."). More recently, California courts have punished solicitation of clients only if it was done using a secret customer list. See Ret. Grp. v. Galante, 176 Cal.App.4th 1226 (2009). Courts have also rejected alleged violations of the agreement based on speculation. See GE Betz, Inc. v. Moffitt-Johnston, 885 F.3d 318 (5th Cir. 2018) (requiring direct evidence of solicitation). Merely connecting with former customers or co-workers on LinkedIn, for instance, is not solicitation. See Bankers Life \& Cas. Co. v. Am. Senior Benefits LLC, 2017 Ill. App. 160687 (Ill. App. Ct. 2017).

Should the dominance of the employer in the industry matter? In Wood v. Acordia of W. Va., Inc., 618 S.E.2d 415 (2005), the court upheld a two-year agreement preventing insurance agents from soliciting any of Acordia's current, former, or prospective customers. In dissent, Justice Starcher pointed out that Acordia was so dominant in the West Virginia insurance market that "every prospect in the market has been spoken for by an Acordia salesman." The agreement at issue thus effectively prevents all competition.
# 4. Noncompetitions Agreements 

Another way of reducing the risk that trade secrets will find their way into the hands of competitors is to limit departing employees' ability to compete with their former employer at all. Employees develop personal relationships with vendors, customers, and others that are immensely useful in business. Noncompetition agreements seek to prevent employees from competing with their former employer for a set period of time or within a particular geographic scope. Such agreements, however, directly impinge upon labor mobility and the ability to pursue gainful employment. Employees' livelihoods often depend on their ability to market their skills and know-how, thereby raising critical public policy and social justice questions. States vary in their approach to enforcing such agreements.

## Edwards v. Arthur Andersen LLP Supreme Court of California 81 Cal. Rptr. 3d 282 (Cal. 2008)

## CHIN, J.

We granted review to address the validity of noncompetition agreements in California and the permissible scope of employment release agreements. We limited our review to the following issues: To what extent does Business and Professions Code section 16600 prohibit employee noncompetition agreements. . . .

We conclude that section 16600 prohibits employee noncompetition agreements unless the agreement falls within a statutory exception. . . . We therefore affirm in part and reverse in part the Court of Appeal judgment.

## Facts

In January 1997, Raymond Edwards II (Edwards), a certified public accountant, was hired as a tax manager by the Los Angeles office of the accounting firm Arthur Andersen LLP (Andersen). Andersen's employment offer was made contingent upon Edwards's signing a noncompetition agreement, which prohibited him from working for or soliciting certain Andersen clients for limited periods following his termination. The agreement was required of all managers, and read in relevant part: "If you leave the Firm, for eighteen months after release or resignation, you agree not to perform professional services of the type you provided for any client on which you worked during the eighteen months prior to release or resignation. This does not prohibit you from accepting employment with a client. For twelve months after you leave the Firm, you agree not to solicit (to perform professional services of the type you provided) any client of the office(s) to which you were assigned during the eighteen months preceding release or resignation. You agree not to solicit away from the Firm any of its professional personnel for eighteen months after release or resignation." Edwards signed the agreement.

Between 1997 and 2002, Edwards continued to work for Andersen, moving into the firm's private client services practice group, where he handled income, gift, and estate tax planning for individuals and entities with large incomes and net worth. Over this period he was promoted to senior manager and was on track to become a partner. In March 2002, the United States government indicted Andersen in connection with the investigation into Enron Corporation, and in June 2002, Andersen announced that it would cease its accounting practices in the United States. In April 2002, Andersen began selling off its practice groups to various entities. In May 2002, Andersen internally announced that HSBC USA, Inc. (a New York-based banking corporation), through a new subsidiary, Wealth and Tax Advisory Services (WTAS), would purchase a portion of Andersen's tax practice, including Edwards's group.

In July 2002, HSBC offered Edwards employment. Before hiring any of Andersen's employees, HSBC required them to execute a "Termination of Non-compete Agreement" (TONC) in order to obtain employment with HSBC. Among other things, the TONC required employees to, inter alia, (1) voluntarily resign from Andersen; (2) release Andersen from "any and all" claims, including "claims that in any way arise from or out of, are based upon or relate to Employee's employment by, association with or compensation from" defendant; (3) continue indefinitely to preserve confidential information and trade secrets except as otherwise required by a court or governmental agency; (4) refrain from disparaging Andersen or its related entities or partners; and (5) cooperate with Andersen in connection with any investigation of, or litigation against, Andersen. In exchange, Andersen would agree to accept Edwards's resignation, agree to Edwards's employment by HSBC, and release Edwards from the 1997 noncompetition agreement. . . .

Edwards signed the HSBC offer letter, but he did not sign the TONC. In response, Andersen terminated Edwards's employment and withheld severance benefits. HSBC withdrew its offer of employment to Edwards.

# Procedural History 

. . . In the published part of its opinion, the Court of Appeal held: (1) the noncompetition agreement was invalid under section 16600, and requiring Edwards to sign the TONC as consideration to be released from it was an independently wrongful act for purposes of the elements of Edwards's claim for intentional interference with prospective economic advantage. . . .

## Discussion

## A. Section 16600

Under the common law, as is still true in many states today, contractual restraints on the practice of a profession, business, or trade, were considered valid, as long as they were reasonably imposed. (Bosley Medical Group v. Abramson (1984) 161 Cal.App.3d 284, 288, 207 Cal.Rptr. 477.) This was true even in California. (Wright v. Ryder (1868) 36 Cal. 342, 357 [relaxing original common law rule that all restraints on trade were invalid in recognition of increasing population and competition in trade].) However, in 1872 California settled public policy in favor of open competition, and rejected the common law "rule of reasonableness," when the Legislature enacted the Civil Code. Today in California, covenants not to compete are void, subject to several exceptions discussed briefly below.
Section 16600 states: "Except as provided in this chapter, every contract by which anyone is restrained from engaging in a lawful profession, trade, or business of any kind is to that extent void." The chapter excepts noncompetition agreements in the sale or dissolution of corporations ( §16601 ), partnerships ( §16602 ), and limited liability corporations ( §16602.5 ). In the years since its original enactment as Civil Code section 1673, our courts have consistently affirmed that section 16600 evinces a settled legislative policy in favor of open competition and employee mobility. (See D'sa v. Playhut, Inc. (2000) 85 Cal.App.4th 927, 933, 102 Cal.Rptr.2d 495.) The law protects Californians and ensures "that every citizen shall retain the right to pursue any lawful employment and enterprise of their choice." (Metro Traffic Control, Inc. v. Shadow Traffic Network (1994) 22 Cal.App.4th 853, 859, 27 Cal.Rptr.2d 573.) It protects "the important legal right of persons to engage in businesses and occupations of their choosing." (Morlife, Inc. v. Perry (1997) 56 Cal.App.4th 1514, 1520, 66 Cal.Rptr.2d 731.) . . .

Under the statute's plain meaning, therefore, an employer cannot by contract restrain a former employee from engaging in his or her profession, trade, or business unless the agreement falls within one of the exceptions to the rule. (§16600.) Andersen, however, asserts that we should interpret the term "restrain" under section 16600 to mean simply to "prohibit," so that only contracts that totally prohibit an employee from engaging in his or her profession, trade, or business are illegal. It would then follow that a mere limitation on an employee's ability to practice his or her vocation would be permissible under section 16600 , as long as it is reasonably based.

Andersen contends that some California courts have held that section 16600 (and its predecessor statutes, Civil Code former sections 1673, 1674, and 1675) are the statutory embodiment of prior common law, and embrace the rule of reasonableness in evaluating competitive restraints. (See, e.g., South Bay Radiology Medical Associates v. Asher (1990) 220 Cal.App.3d 1074, 1080, 269 Cal.Rptr. 15 (South Bay Radiology) [ §16600 embodies common law prohibition against restraints on trade]; Vacco Industries, Inc. v. Van Den Berg (1992) 5 Cal.App.4th 34, 47-48, 6 Cal.Rptr.2d 602 [ §16600 is codification of common law reasonable restraint rule].) Andersen claims that these cases show that section 16600 "prohibits only broad agreements that prevent a person from engaging entirely in his chosen business, trade or profession. Agreements that do not have this broad effect-but merely regulate some aspect of post-employment conduct, e.g., to prevent raiding [employer's personnel]-are not within the scope of [s]ection 16600."

As Edwards observes, however, the cases Andersen cites to support a relaxation of the statutory rule simply recognize that the statutory exceptions to section 16600 reflect the same exceptions to the rule against noncompetition agreements that were implied in the common law. . . .

We conclude that Andersen's noncompetition agreement was invalid. As the Court of Appeal observed, "The first challenged clause prohibited Edwards, for an 18-month period, from performing professional services of the type he had provided while at Andersen, for any client on whose account he had worked during 18 months prior to his termination. The second challenged clause prohibited Edwards, for a year after termination, from 'soliciting,' defined by the agreement as providing professional services to any client of Andersen's Los Angeles office." The agreement restricted Edwards from performing work for Andersen's Los Angeles clients and therefore restricted his ability to practice his accounting profession. (See Thompson v. Impaxx, Inc. (2003) 113 Cal.App. 4th 1425, 1429, 7 Cal.Rptr.3d 427 [distinguishing "trade route" and solicitation cases that protect trade secrets or confidential proprietary information].) The noncompetition agreement that Edwards was required to sign before commencing employment with Andersen was therefore invalid because it restrained his ability to practice his profession. (See Muggill, supra, 62 Cal.2d at pp. 242-243, 42 Cal.Rptr. 107, 398 P.2d 147.)

# B. Ninth Circuit's Narrow-Restraint Exception 

Andersen asks this court to adopt the limited or "narrow-restraint" exception to section 16600 that the Ninth Circuit discussed in Campbell v. Trustees of Leland Stanford Jr. Univ. (9th Cir. 1987) 817 F.2d 499 (Campbell), and that the trial court relied on in this case in order to uphold the noncompetition agreement. In Campbell, the Ninth Circuit acknowledged that California has rejected the common law "rule of reasonableness" with respect to restraints upon the ability to pursue a profession, but concluded that section 16600 "only makes illegal those restraints which preclude one from engaging in a lawful profession, trade, or business." (Campbell, 817 F.2d at p. 502.) The court remanded the case to the district court in order to allow the employee to prove that the noncompetition agreement at issue completely restrained him from practicing his "profession, trade, or business within the meaning of section 16600." (Campbell, at p. 503.)

The confusion over the Ninth Circuit's application of section 16600 arose in a paragraph in Campbell, in which the court noted that some California courts have excepted application of section 16600 "'where one is barred from pursuing only a small or limited part of the business, trade or profession." (Campbell, supra, 817 F.2d at p. 502.) . . .

Andersen is correct, however, that Campbell has been followed in some recent Ninth Circuit cases to create a narrow-restraint exception to section 16600 in federal court. . . .

Contrary to Andersen's belief, however, California courts have not embraced the Ninth Circuit's narrow-restraint exception. Indeed, no reported California state court decision has endorsed the Ninth Circuit's reasoning, and we are of the view that California courts "have been clear in their expression that section 16600 represents a strong public policy of the state which should not be diluted by judicial fiat." (Scott v. Snelling and Snelling, Inc. (N.D. Cal. 1990) 732 F.Supp. 1034, 1042.) Section 16600 is unambiguous, and if the Legislature intended the statute to apply only to restraints that were unreasonable or overbroad, it could have included language to that effect. We reject Andersen's contention that we should adopt a narrow-restraint exception to section 16600 and leave it to the Legislature, if it chooses, either to relax the statutory restrictions or adopt additional exceptions to the prohibition-against-restraint rule under section 16600 . . .

# DISPOSITION 

We hold that the noncompetition agreement here is invalid under section 16600, and we reject the narrow-restraint exception urged by Andersen. Noncompetition agreements are invalid under section 16600 in California even if narrowly drawn, unless they fall within the applicable statutory exceptions of sections 16601,16602 , or 16602.5. . . .

We therefore affirm in part and reverse in part the Court of Appeal judgment, and remand the matter for proceedings consistent with the views expressed above.

In Comprehensive Technologies Int'l v. Software Artisans, Inc., 3 F.3d 730 (4th Cir. 1993), CTI brought suit for copyright infringement and misappropriation of trade secrets against a group of former employees who left the company to form a competing company which shortly thereafter came out with a new product. The court concluded that the departing employees had not infringed CTI's copyrights or misappropriated any CTI trade secrets. Nonetheless, the court enforced an agreement signed by one of the employees, Dean Hawkes. The agreement provided that for a period of twelve months after he left CTI, Hawkes would not engage directly or indirectly in any business within the United States (financially as an investor or lender or as an employee, director, officer, partner, independent contractor, consultant or owner or in any other capacity calling for the rendition of personal services or acts of management, operation or control) which is in competition with the business of CTI. For purposes of this Agreement, the "business of CTI" shall be defined as the design, development, marketing, and sales of CLAIMS EXPRESS and EDI LINK-type PC-based software with the same functionality and methodology. . . .
The court stated the general legal standard governing covenants not to compete:
Virginia has established a three-part test for assessing the reasonableness of restrictive employment covenants. Under the test, the court must ask the following questions:

1. Is the restraint, from the standpoint of the employer, reasonable in the sense that it is no greater than is necessary to protect the employer in some legitimate business interest?
2. From the standpoint of the employee, is the restraint reasonable in the sense that it is not unduly harsh and oppressive in curtailing his legitimate efforts to earn a livelihood?
3. Is the restraint reasonable from the standpoint of a sound public policy?

Blue Ridge Anesthesia \& Critical Care, Inc. v. Gidick, 239 Va. 369, 389 S.E.2d 467, 469 (Va. 1990). If a covenant not to compete meets each of these standards of reasonableness, it must be enforced. As a general rule, however, the Virginia courts do not look favorably upon covenants not to compete, and will strictly construe them against the employer. The employer bears the burden of demonstrating that the restraint is reasonable.
The court found that Hawkes's agreement, which prevented him from competing with CTI anywhere in the United States, was reasonable because CTI had offices, clients, or prospects in many (though not all) states throughout the country. Further, the court noted:

As the individual primarily responsible for the design, development, marketing and sale of CTI's software, Hawkes became intimately familiar with every aspect of CTI's operation, and necessarily acquired information that he could use to compete with CTI in the marketplace. When an employee has access to confidential and trade secret information crucial to the success of the employer's business, the employer has a strong interest in enforcing a covenant not to compete because other legal remedies often prove inadequate. It will often be difficult, if not impossible, to prove that a competing employee has misappropriated trade secret information belonging to his former employer. On the facts of this case, we conclude that the scope of the employment restrictions is no broader than necessary to protect CTI's legitimate business interests.

# COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS 

1. The California rule set out in §16600 is the minority rule, but it is gaining broader acceptance. Other states, including Alabama, Oklahoma, Louisiana, Minnesota, Montana, North Dakota, and the District of Columbia, also forbid noncompetition agreements. Several states have enacted or are considering restrictions on noncompete agreements. Massachusetts, for example, requires advance notice of a noncompete before starting work, limits noncompetes to 12 months duration, bans their use for certain categories of employees, including hourly workers and those fired or laid off, and requires the employer to pay "garden leave" to former employees who can't work. A growing number of states, including Illinois, Washington, Oregon, Nevada, New Hampshire, and Colorado, ban noncompetes applied to "low-wage workers." See, e.g., 820 ILCS §90; Colo. Rev. Stat. §8-2-113. Still other states, including Colorado, Delaware, Massachusetts, and Tennessee, forbid them in professional settings but allow them in other contexts. See, e.g., Murfreesboro Med. Clinic v. Udom, 166 S.W.3d 674 (Tenn. 2005). In 2023, the Federal Trade Commission proposed to ban most noncompete agreements nationwide. See Federal Trade Commission, FTC Proposes Rule to Ban Noncompete Clauses, Which Hurt Workers and Harm Competition §910.1(b)(2)(1) (Jan. 5, 2023).

Most states that do not ban noncompetes outright apply an overarching requirement of "reasonableness" to covenants not to compete, as the Virginia court did in CTI. See MiCH. COMP. LAWS §445.774 a (noncompetition agreements enforceable if the agreement is "reasonable as to its duration, geographical area, and type of employment or line of business"). As a general matter that means the majority of states enforce noncompetes are long as they are reasonably limited. See ADP, LLC v. Kusins, 215 A.3d 924 (App. Div. N.J. 2019) (enforcing non- compete against sales reps limited to geographic region they served). They may disagree, however, on what restrictions are reasonable. In Gateway 2000 Inc. v. Kelley, 9 F.Supp.2d 790 (E.D. Mich. 1998), the court invalidated an agreement that was similar to the one upheld in CTI. The court relied in part on the fact that the company had later adopted a less restrictive noncompetition provision, suggesting that the older, broader provision was not necessary to protect its interests. And the Virginia Supreme Court has held unreasonable a noncompetition agreement that prevented the defendant from working for a competitor in any capacity, rather than specifying particular positions the defendant could not take. See Modern Environments, Inc. v. Stinnett, 561 S.E.2d 694 (Va. 2002); see also Mutual Service Casualty Ins. Co. v. Brass, 625 N.W.2d 648 (Wis. Ct. App. 2001); Brentlinger Enters. v. Curran, 752 N.E.2d 994 (Ohio Ct. App. 2001); Harvey Barnett, Inc. v. Shidler, 143 F.Supp.2d 1247 (D. Colo. 2001); Mertz v. Pharmacists Mutual Ins., 625 N.W.2d 197 (Neb. 2001); City Slickers, Inc. v. Douglas, 40 S.W.3d 805 (Ark. Ct. App. 2001); Intertek Testing Servs. v. Eastman, 2023 WL 2544236 (Del. Ch. Mar. 16, 2023) (refusing to enforce three-year noncompete against co-founder who had sold the business).

What agreements are "reasonable" is far from clear in this context and is the subject of considerable litigation. Compare Paramount Termite Control Co. v. Rector, 380 S.E.2d 922 (Va. 1989) (upholding a two-year noncompete) with Home Paramount Pest Control v. Shaffer, 718 S.E.2d 762 (Va. 2011) (striking down the identical noncompete agreement). Some courts have limited the enforcement of noncompetition agreements to situations where trade secrets are likely to be used or disclosed if an employee is allowed to compete. The New York Court of Appeals, for example, took the following view:

Undoubtedly judicial disfavor of these covenants is provoked by "powerful considerations of public policy which militate against sanctioning the loss of a man's livelihood" (Purchasing Assoc. v. Weitz. . . .) Indeed, our economy is premised on the competition engendered by the uninhibited flow of services, talent and ideas. Therefore, no restrictions should fetter an employee's right to apply to his own best advantage the skills and knowledge acquired by the overall experience of his previous employment. This includes those techniques which are but "skillful variations of general processes known to the particular trade" (RESTATEMENT, AGENCY 2d, §396 Comment b).

Of course, the courts must also recognize the legitimate interest an employer has in safeguarding that which has made his business successful and to protect himself against deliberate surreptitious commercial piracy. Thus restrictive covenants will be enforceable to the extent necessary to prevent the disclosure or use of trade secrets or confidential customer information. In addition injunctive relief may be available where an employee's services are unique or extraordinary and the covenant is reasonable. This latter principle has been interpreted to reach agreements between members of the learned professions.
Reed Roberts Assocs. v. Strauman, 40 N.Y.2d 303, 353 N.E.2d 590 (Ct. App. 1976). Does the Reed Roberts approach in essence hold noncompetition agreements unenforceable, since it allows them to operate only when trade secret laws also provide relief? Are there sound reasons to enforce an employer-employee agreement that prevents the employee from competing after termination?

If a noncompetition agreement is overbroad, should the courts refuse to enforce it at all, or should they narrow it to make it enforceable? Compare Coleman v. Retina Consultants, 687 S.E.2d 457 (Ga. 2009) (refusing to reform unenforceable agreement) and NEV. REV. STAT. §613.200 (barring judicial reformation of problematic noncompete agreements) with ADP, LLC v. Rafferty, 923 F.3d 113 (3d Cir. 2019) (holding that overbroad agreements should be "blue-penciled": edited by the courts to make them reasonable).
2. There seems to be no question in the CTI court's mind that none of the defendants misappropriated any CTI trade secrets, infringed any copyrights, or otherwise "took" anything belonging to CTI in starting Software Artisans. Why doesn't that dispose of the case? What social purpose is served by enjoining former employees from pursuing their livelihood? In ADP, LLC v. Rafferty, 923 F.3d 113 (3d Cir. 2019), the court held that "the preservation of client relationships and goodwill" was a legitimate business justification for preventing competition by departing employees.
3. California courts have interpreted BUSINESS \& PROFESSIONS CODE §16600 to bar noncompetition agreements altogether in employee contracts but to permit such agreements if they are ancillary to the sale of a business, so long as the terms of the agreement are "reasonable." See Ixchel Pharma, LLC v. Biogen, Inc., 9 Cal.5th 1130 (2020); Monogram Indus., Inc. v. SAR Indus., Inc., 64 Cal. App. 3d 692, 134 Cal. Rptr. 714, 718 (1976). Further, while California courts will not enforce a noncompetition agreement, they will prevent departing employees from using or disclosing their former employer's trade secrets. See State Farm Mutual Automobile Ins. Co. v. Dempster, 344 P.2d 821 (Cal. Ct. App. 1959); Gordon v. Landau, 49 Cal.2d 690, 321 P.2d 456 (Cal. 1958). And §16600 does not prevent an employer from barring current employees from moonlighting for a competitor while still employed. Techno Lite Inc. v. Emcod LLC, 44 Cal.App.5th 462 (2020).
4. The strength of California's commitment to the free movement of employees was demonstrated in The Application Group, Inc. v. The Hunter Group, Inc., 72 Cal. Rptr. 2d 73 (Ct. App. 1998). There, the California Court of Appeals held that §16600 precluded the enforcement of a noncompetition agreement entered into in Maryland between a Maryland employer and employee, where the employee subsequently left to take a job telecommuting from Maryland for a California company. Despite the fact that Maryland courts would enforce the agreement, the California court concluded that California's interests were "materially stronger" than Maryland's in this case. See also D'Sav. Playhut, Inc., 85 Cal. App. 4th 927, 102 Cal. Rptr. 2d 495 (2000) (disregarding choice of law provision in holding a noncompete agreement unenforceable); Nuvasive, Inc. v. Alphatec Holdings, 2019 WL 40108 (Del. Ct. Chan. Aug. 26, 2019) (finding that California's interest in barring noncompetes substantially outweighs Delaware's interest in a case involving a California employee; refusing to enforce Delaware choice of law clause in contract). California reinforced its policy in 2017 by enacting CAL. LABOR CODE §925, which prevents companies from sending noncompete cases to arbitration.

California's strong public policy has led to conflicts with other states. The most notable example is Advanced Bionics v. Medtronic, 87 Cal. App. 4th 1235 (2001), in which both California and Minnesota courts asserted that their law should control, with the Minnesota court enjoining the departing employee and the California court enjoining the employer from proceeding with the suit. The California Supreme Court ultimately reversed, not because it didn't consider the policy of employee mobility important but because it thought the specter of conflicting judgments unseemly. Advanced Bionics v. Medtronic, 29 Cal. 4th 697, 128 Cal. Rptr. 2d 172 (2002). But the California court's deference to a sister court may simply subjugate California's policy to the law of any other state that would enforce a noncompete agreement, even if the employee doesn't work in that state. See IBM Corp. v. Bajorek, 191 F.3d 1033 (9th Cir. 1999) (applying New York law to enjoin competition against New York company by employee in California, and disregarding California policy to the contrary); Draftkings Inc. v. Hermalyn, 118 F.4th 416 (1st Cir. 2024) (applying Massachusetts law over California law to enforce a noncompete against a California employee); Amazon.com, Inc. v. Powers, 2012 WL 6726538 (W.D. Wash. Dec. 27, 2012) (enforcing Washington choice of law clause in noncompete contract against employee who left Amazon.com to work for Google in California). For a contrary ruling giving nationwide effect to a refusal to enforce a noncompete agreement under Georgia law, see Palmer \& Cay v. Marsh \& McLennan, 404 F.3d 1297 (11th Cir. 2005).

Is there a reasoned way to resolve such conflicts in public policy? Or will the inevitable result be a "race to the courthouse"? After Advanced Bionics, California enacted CAL. LABOR CODE §925, which prohibits employers from requiring Californiabased employees to agree to litigate their noncompetes outside the state. That suggests California remains strongly committed to protecting its employees against noncompetes.
5. What are the competing policy interests at stake in noncompetition clauses? On the one hand, it seems unfair to employers to simply allow their employees to do whatever they want upon leaving. Particularly where the employees were in positions of importance, their knowledge of the employer's trade secrets may leave the former employer at a competitive disadvantage. In a competitive industry, preventing the disclosure of trade secrets is far preferable to suing for misappropriation after the trade secrets have already been disclosed, and employers may see a noncompetition agreement as a way to short-circuit any risk of trade secret misappropriation.

On the other hand, such restrictions seem onerous burdens to impose on employees. See Viva Moffat, The Wrong Tool for the Job: The IP Problem with Non-Competition Agreements, 52 Wm. \& MARY L. REV. 873 (2010). Imagine how you would feel as an attorney if you left a firm only to find that you were prevented from practicing law in the same field or geographic region for the next two years. (In this regard, it is significant that Reed Roberts expressed the view that the "learned professions" were properly subject to noncompetition agreements.) See Central Indiana Podiatry PC v. Krueger, 882 N.E. 2 d 723 (Ind. 2008) (noncompete agreement enforceable against physician if reasonable). In addition, it is not completely clear that such provisions benefit companies in the long run. Strauman, the defendant in Reed Roberts, came to Reed Roberts after having worked for a competitor for four years. He was hired in part because of his valuable experience in the industry. What if Strauman's former employer had required him to sign an enforceable noncompete agreement? See Charles Tait Graves, Analyzing the Non-Competition Covenant as a Category of Intellectual Property Regulation, 3 Hastings Sci. \& Tech. L.J. 69 (2010) (criticizing enforcement of noncompetes).

Some scholars have suggested that there is a more practical economic motivation for precluding such noncompetition agreements. They argue that the relative success of California's Silicon Valley compared to Boston's Route 128 is directly attributable to the prevalence of noncompetition agreements in Route 128 companies, which prevented the free movement of employees and therefore discouraged start-up companies. See Orly Lobel, Talent Wants To Be Free: Why We Should Learn To Love Leaks, Raids, And Free Riding (2015) (citing numerous empirical studies that noncompetes restrict innovation); Ronald J. Gilson, The Legal Infrastructure of High Technology Industrial Districts: Silicon Valley, Route 128, and Covenants Not to Compete, 74 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 575 (1999); Annalee Saxenian, Regional Advantage: Culture and Competition in Silicon Valley And Route 128 (1994); but see Jonathan Barnett \& Ted M. Sichelman, The Case for Noncompetes, 86 U. Chi. L. Rev. 953 (2020) (calling into question the role of noncompete agreements in the emergence of Silicon Valley over Route 128 and the larger empirical literature questioning noncompetes, and concluding that the common law's reasonableness standard likely represents the best approach).
6. When a firm requires an existing employee to sign an employment agreement containing a covenant not to compete, the employee is giving up something substantial. What is the employer giving up? Some cases have raised the issue of consideration (in the contract law sense) in such an agreement on the part of the employer; they generally conclude that there is consideration, on one theory or another. See, e.g., Central Adjustment Bureau v. Ingram, 678 S.W.2d 28 (Tenn. 1984) (consideration in the form of continuous employment over a long period of time); Alex Sheshunoff Mgmt. Servs. v. Johnson, 209 S.W.3d 644, 646 (Tex. 2006) (same; rejecting prior Texas case law); Lake Land Emp. Grp. v. Columber, 804 N.E.2d 27 (Ohio 2004) (consideration in the form of continuing to employ an at-will employee; three Justices dissented).

Why not require, out of fairness, that an employer who insists on such a covenant must pay the employee's salary during the term of the noncompete provision? Several other nations follow this approach:

- Germany: The German Commercial Code requires that an employer compensate the employee for the complete duration of time that the covenant is in effect up to a maximum duration of two years. See WENDI S. LAZAR \& GARY R. Siniscalco (Eds.), Restrictive Covenants And Trade Secrets in EMPLOYMENT LaW: An International Survey, Vol. I, 17-5 (2010) (German Commercial Code §74(a)(1)). Compensation must be at least half of the employee's pay during the previous 12 months of employment.

- China: In 2008, China adopted a similar regime. See PRC LABOR CONTRACT LAW of 1 January 2008, Articles 23-24 (2008). Employers may include noncompete restrictions of no more than two years in employment agreements with senior technicians, senior managers, and other employees who have access to trade secrets. Under the law, the employer must compensate the employee throughout the post-employment noncompete period, although the law does not specify the compensation level. It is unclear whether the compensation must be at the prior level or can be as low as minimum wage.
- United Kingdom: The UK employs a "garden leave" policy, under which the employee must provide the employer with a long notice period before changing employment. The employer is required to pay full salary and benefits during this period, but cannot force the employee to work. (The name comes from the idea that the employee can stay at home and tend their garden.) The garden leave period must be reasonable under the circumstances of the employment.
Some U.S. companies have adopted such approaches on a voluntary basis. See Marcam Corp. v. Orchard, 885 F.Supp. 294 (D. Mass. 1995) (enforcing a contractual provision preventing Orchard from working for any competitor in the country for one year, provided that Marcam paid 110 percent of the salary offered by the competitor). See Sonya P. Passi, Compensated Injunctions: A More Equitable Solution to the Problem of Inevitable Disclosure, 27 BERKELEY TECH. L.J. 927 (2012) (suggesting such an approach). Is the employee likely to be satisfied by that approach? How employable will he be after sitting idle for two years?

On the other hand, Delaware takes the position that companies can condition compensation on agreements not to compete and can claw back stock paid to employees years earlier if they later compete with the employer. See LKQ Corp. v. Rutledge, 2024 WL 5152476 (Del. Dec. 18, 2024). As a practical matter that is likely to have the same effect as enjoining employment.
7. Does the reasonableness of a noncompete agreement depend on the likelihood of trade secret misappropriation? In Zodiac Records, Inc. v. Choice Envt'l Servs., 112 So.2d 587 (Fla. Ct. App. 2013), the court held that a three-year noncompete was unreasonable and violated due process where the plaintiff stipulated that it could not show that the defendant would use its trade secrets unless the agreement was enforced.
8. Can an employer avoid state laws restricting noncompetition agreements by requiring the employee to sign an agreement that does not forbid employment, but calls for the payment of a "liquidated damage" penalty if the employee goes to work for a competitor? Is such a monetary penalty effectively the same as enforcing a noncompete? What if the employer doesn't forbid employment, but conditions the grant of stock options on not going to work for a competitor? See ADP, LLC v. Rafferty, 923 F.3d 113
(3d Cir. 2019) (upholding such a condition). Note that it is common in high-tech industries to grant employees stock options that "vest" over a period of years, giving the employee an incentive not to leave and abandon the unvested options. Those provisions are legal.
9. Despite their unenforceability, many employers in California require employees to sign noncompete agreements. See J.J. Prescott et al., Understanding Noncompetition Agreements: the 2014 Noncompete Survey Project, 2016 MiCH. St. L. Rev. 369. Employees who do not know that the agreements are unenforceable might be deterred from going to work for a competitor or starting their own business. Should employers that knowingly require unenforceable agreements face some penalty for doing so?
10. States that enforce noncompetes nonetheless allow departing employees to "prepare to compete" during the term of the agreement, "because restraining such acts would have the effect of extending the term of the covenant." In re Document Techs. Litig., 275 F.Supp.3d 54, 464 (S.D.N.Y. 2017).

Are there circumstances in which an employee's use or disclosure of trade secrets is "inevitable," so that the only way to avoid misappropriation of the secret is to preclude employment altogether? Consider the following case:

# PepsiCo, Inc. v. Redmond <br> United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit 54 F.3d 1262 (7th Cir. 1995) 

FLAUM, CIRCUIT JUDGE.
[The district court ordered the issuance of a preliminary injunction preventing Quaker Oats Co. from employing Redmond, a former general manager for PepsiCo North America. Redmond was general manager of PepsiCo's California business unit for ten years until, in 1994, he accepted Quaker's offer to become the chief operating officer of its Gatorade and Snapple Co. divisions. The court held that Redmond would inevitably be forced to use PepsiCo trade secrets for his new employer.]

PepsiCo asserts that Redmond cannot help but rely on PCNA [PepsiCo North America] trade secrets as he helps plot Gatorade and Snapple's new course, and that these secrets will enable Quaker to achieve a substantial advantage by knowing exactly how PCNA will price, distribute, and market its sports drinks and new age drinks and being able to respond strategically. This type of trade secret problem may arise less often, but it nevertheless falls within the realm of trade secret protection under the present circumstance.

Quaker and Redmond assert that they have not and do not intend to use whatever confidential information Redmond has by virtue of his former employment. They point out that Redmond has already signed an agreement with Quaker not to disclose any trade secrets or confidential information gleaned from his earlier employment. They also note with regard to distribution systems that even if Quaker wanted to steal information about PCNA's distribution plans, they would be completely useless in attempting to integrate the Gatorade and Snapple beverage lines.

The defendants' arguments fall somewhat short of the mark. Again, the danger of misappropriation in the present case is not that Quaker threatens to use PCNA's secrets to create distribution systems or coopt PCNA's advertising and marketing ideas. Rather, PepsiCo believes that Quaker, unfairly armed with knowledge of PCNA's plans, will be able to anticipate its distribution, packaging, pricing, and marketing moves. Redmond and Quaker even concede that Redmond might be faced with a decision that could be influenced by certain confidential information that he obtained while at PepsiCo. In other words, PepsiCo finds itself in the position of a coach, one of whose players has left, playbook in hand, to join the opposing team before the big game. Quaker and Redmond's protestations that their distribution systems and plans are entirely different from PCNA's are thus not really responsive. . . .

Quaker and Redmond do not assert that the confidentiality agreement is invalid; such agreements are enforceable when supported by adequate consideration. ^[10] Rather, they argue that "inevitable" breaches of these contracts may not be enjoined. The case on which they rely, however, R. R. Donnelley \& Sons Co. v. Fagan, 767 F.Supp. 1259 (S.D.N.Y. 1991) (applying Illinois law), says nothing of the sort. The R. R. Donnelley court merely found that the plaintiffs had failed to prove the existence of any confidential information or any indication that the defendant would ever use it. Id. at 1267. The threat of misappropriation that drives our holding with regard to trade secrets dictates the same result here.
... In Teradyne [v. Clear Communications Corp., 707 F.Supp. 353 (N.D. Ill. 1989)], Teradyne alleged that a competitor, Clear Communications, had lured employees away from Teradyne and intended to employ them in the same field. In an insightful opinion, Judge Zagel observed that "threatened misappropriation can be enjoined under Illinois law" where there is a "high degree of probability of inevitable and immediate . . . use of . . . trade secrets." Teradyne, 707 F.Supp. at 356. Judge Zagel held, however, that Teradyne's complaint failed to state a claim because Teradyne did not allege "that defendants have in fact threatened to use Teradyne's secrets or that they will inevitably do so." [The Teradyne court held]:
the defendants' claimed acts, working for Teradyne, knowing its business, leaving its business, hiring employees from Teradyne and entering the same field (though in a market not yet serviced by Teradyne) do not state a claim of threatened misappropriation. All that is alleged, at bottom, is that defendants could misuse plaintiff's secrets, and plaintiffs fear they will. This is not enough. It may be that little more is needed, but falling a little short is still falling short.

Id. at 357 .
In AMP we affirmed the denial of a preliminary injunction on the grounds that the plaintiff AMP had failed to show either the existence of any trade secrets or the likelihood that defendant Fleischhacker, a former AMP employee, would compromise those secrets or any other confidential business information. AMP, which produced electrical and electronic connection devices, argued that Fleischhacker's new position at AMP's competitor would inevitably lead him to compromise AMP's trade secrets regarding the manufacture of connectors. AMP,823 F.2d at 1207. In rejecting that argument, we emphasized that the mere fact that a person assumed a similar position at a competitor does not, without more, make it "inevitable that he will use or disclose . . . trade secret information" so as to "demonstrate irreparable injury." Id.

The ITSA, Teradyne, and AMP lead to the same conclusion: a plaintiff may prove a claim of trade secret misappropriation by demonstrating that defendant's new employment will inevitably lead him to rely on the plaintiff's trade secrets. See also 1 JAGER, . . . §7.02[2][a] at 7-20 (noting claims where "the allegation is based on the fact that the disclosure of trade secrets in the new employment is inevitable, whether or not the former employee acts consciously or unconsciously"). . . .

PepsiCo presented substantial evidence at the preliminary injunction hearing that Redmond possessed extensive and intimate knowledge about PCNA's strategic goals for 1995 in sports drinks and new age drinks. The district court concluded on the basis of that presentation that unless Redmond possessed an uncanny ability to compartmentalize information, he would necessarily be making decisions about Gatorade and Snapple by relying on his knowledge of PCNA trade secrets. It is not the "general skills and knowledge acquired during his tenure with" PepsiCo that PepsiCo seeks to keep from falling into Quaker's hands, but rather "the particularized plans or processes developed by [PCNA] and disclosed to him while the employer-employee relationship existed, which are unknown to others in the industry and which give the employer an advantage over his competitors." AMP,823 F.2d at 1202. The Teradyne and AMP plaintiffs could do nothing more than assert that skilled employees were taking their skills elsewhere; PepsiCo has done much more.

# COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS 

1. What Pepsi trade secrets are threatened by Redmond's "defection" to Quaker? The information Redmond possesses includes: (1) new flavor and product packaging information; (2) pricing strategies; (3) Pepsi's "attack plans" for specific markets; and (4) Pepsi's new distribution plan, being pilot tested in California. What advantages would Quaker obtain by knowing this information? How long would it take Quaker to find out about each in the absence of inside knowledge from Redmond? If all these items would become readily apparent the moment Pepsi's plans were implemented, does this circumstance suggest a limit on the appropriate remedy?

Assuming that Quaker will learn of Pepsi's strategies from Redmond unless enjoined, how expensive would it be for Pepsi to develop a new marketing strategy?
Could the new strategy take advantage of the fact that Quaker thinks it knows what Pepsi will do? How would this possibility affect Quaker's use of the information?
2. Assume that the market for sports and new age drinks is increasingly concentrated in the hands of two companies, Pepsi and Quaker. Should this affect the outcome of the case? Given the court's decision, what can one predict about future salary and benefits negotiations in this industry for employees like Redmond?
3. Is it fair to preclude former employees from doing any work for a competitor simply because they would be incapable of not using the information they obtained from their former employer? Note that the Seventh Circuit upheld an injunction against Redmond's employment for only six months. At the same time, the court issued a permanent injunction against the disclosure of Pepsi's trade secrets. Does this result make sense? If the theory of inevitable disclosure is that Redmond must use Pepsi's secrets in his employment, could he go to work for Quaker at the end of six months without violating the permanent injunction? Perhaps the court was implicitly seeking to balance Redmond's interests in employment mobility, reasoning that the business secrets would be less important after that time.
4. Is there any way that that employee can "keep separate" the ideas and projects he was working on for his old employer from the ideas and projects he will be asked to develop for his new employer? If not, should the employer be entitled to prevent the employee from competing even if it cannot show that the employee intends to use its trade secrets? Cf. Al Minor \& Assocs. v. Martin, 881 N.E. 2 d 850 (Ohio 2008) (holding that the fact that a defendant had the plaintiff's secrets in his memory rather than on a disk or document did not preclude a finding of misappropriation).

Several cases have followed PepsiCo and enjoined employment absent either proof of trade secret misappropriation or an enforceable noncompetition agreement. See Uncle B's Bakery v. O'Rourke, 920 F.Supp. 1405 (N.D. Iowa 1996) (citing PepsiCo with approval and enjoining former plant manager at a bagel manufacturer from working for any competing business within a 500 -mile radius); see also Nat'l Starch \& Chem. Corp. v. Parker Chem. Corp., 530 A.2d 31 (N.J. Super. Ct. App. Div. 1987). By contrast, one court has adopted what might be called a "partial inevitable disclosure" injunction. See Merck \& Co. v. Lyon, 941 F.Supp. 1443 (M.D.N.C. 1996) (enjoining a pharmaceutical marketing director from discussing his former employer's products or pricing for a period of two years, but declining to enjoin him from competing employment altogether absent a "showing of bad faith"); Novell Inc. v. Timpanogos Research Grp., 46 U.S.P.Q.2d 1197 (D. Utah 1998) (applying the doctrine, but limiting injunction duration to nine months because the secrets at risk would turn stale over time).
5. One court notes that in discussing "inevitable disclosure doctrine" that "calling a line of reasoning a 'doctrine' poses the risk of ossifying the 'factors' into a rigid test." Molon Motor \& Coil Cor. v. Nidec Motor Corp., 2017 WL 1954531, at *5 n. 13 (N.D. Ill. May 11, 2017). The "inevitable disclosure" language is used by many courts to summarize evidentiary showings pointing to an ongoing imminent risk of "threatened misappropriation." See PETER S. MENELL, ET AL., TRADE SECRET CASE MANAGEMENT JUDICIAL GUIDE §§2.6.1.1, 5.2, 5.8 (2023) (collecting cases and discussing factual showings pointing toward and away from a finding of imminent threatened misappropriation sufficient to support a claim for pre-trial injunctive relief); Stacey Dogan \& Felicity Slater, The Long Shadow of Inevitable Disclosure, 30 Geo. Mason L. REV. 3 (2023) (noting that only a handful of jurisdictions have adopted the most extreme form of the doctrine and even those states rarely apply it to limit employee mobility). These showings are almost always based in on improper acts and not simply information that an individual knows.
6. Some jurisdictions reject the inevitable disclosure doctrine altogether. California's strict policy favoring employee mobility is the clearest example. See CAL. Bus. \& Prof. Code §16600. Some jurisdictions have rejected injunctions barring employment based on inevitable disclosure, although they have indicated that a noncompetition agreement could achieve such a result. See Campbell Soup Co. v. Giles, 47 F.3d 467 (1st Cir. 1995) (noting that public policy "counsels against unilateral conversion of nondisclosure agreements into non-competitive agreements"); Carolina Chem. Equip. Co. v. Muckenfuss, 471 S.E.2d 721 (S.C. Ct. App. 1996) (agreement entitled "Covenant Not to Divulge Trade Secrets" was an overbroad and unenforceable covenant not to compete, because the definition of trade secrets in the agreement effectively prevented any competition); Del Monte Fresh Produce Co. v. Dole Food Co., 148 F.Supp.2d 1326, 1337-39 (S.D. Fla. 2001) (same); see also Holton v. Physician Oncology Servs., 742 S.E.2d 702, 705-06 (Ga. 2013) (holding that "the inevitable disclosure doctrine is not an independent claim under which a trial court may enjoin an employee from working for an employer or disclosing trade secrets"; such relief is only available upon a showing of actual or threatened misappropriation); LeJeune v. Coin Acceptors, 849 A.2d 451, 469-71 (Md. 2004); FMC Corp. v. Cyprus Foote Mineral Co., 899 F.Supp. 1477, 1483 (W.D.N.C. 1995) (stating that North Carolina's "courts would refuse to enjoin an employee from working for its former employer's competitor under the doctrine of 'inevitable discovery' absent some showing of bad faith, underhanded dealing, or employment by an entity so plainly lacking comparable technology that misappropriation can be inferred").
7. The federal Defend Trade Secrets Act, enacted in 2016, acknowledges the conflicts between the states but declines to adopt an inevitable disclosure rule that would override the public policy of California and other states favoring employee mobility. See S. Rep., No. 114-220, 114th Cong., 2D Sess., Defend Trade Secrets Act of 201612 n. 12 (2016). To avoid doing so, the DTSA requires that proof of threatened future misappropriation be based on evidence of conduct and intent and not simply inferred from the employee's position or knowledge. 18 U.S.C. §1836(b)(3)(A)(i). That section provides that a court may:
(A) grant an injunction (i) to prevent any actual or threatened misappropriation described in paragraph (1) on such terms as the court deems reasonable, provided the order does not (I) prevent a person from entering into an employment relationship, and that the conditions placed on such employment shall be based on evidence of threatened misappropriation and not merely on the information the person knows; or (II) otherwise conflict with an applicable State law prohibiting restraints on the practice of a lawful profession, trade, or business.
The SENATE REPORT notes that " [t] hese limitations on injunctive relief were included to protect employee mobility, as some have expressed concern that the injunctive relief authorized under the bill could override State-law limitations that safeguard employee mobility and thus could be a substantial departure from existing law in those states." S. REP., S. 1890 at 12. Thus, inevitable disclosure is not a viable theory under the DTSA. See Idexx Labs. v. Bilbrough, 2022 WL 3042966 (D. Me. Aug. 2, 2022); CAE Integrated v. Moov Techs., Inc., 44 F.4th 257, 262-63 (5th Cir. 2022) (holding that where an employee had discarded all customer lists before moving to a new firm, the DTSA did not prohibit him from taking the job even if he still knew the customer information because doing so would impermissibly be based on his knowledge and not his behavior).

At the same time, the DTSA does not preempt state laws that apply the inevitable disclosure doctrine.
8. How inevitable must the disclosure be? In Bimbo Bakeries v. Botticella, 613 F.3d 102 (3d Cir. 2010), the court affirmed an injunction preventing a senior executive of Bimbo Bakeries, the maker of Thomas' English Muffins, from going to work for competitor Hostess. Botticella was one of only seven people at Bimbo who knew the formula for the muffins. Notably, the court did not find that it was "virtually impossible" for Botticella to do his job at Hostess without disclosing the formula. Instead, the court found it sufficient that there was a "substantial threat" of misappropriation. Does this result make sense? If the defendant denies any intent to deliver the secret to his new employer, what evidence should a court require before preventing him from going to work? Some courts seek to strike a middle ground, holding that where misappropriation is merely threatened rather than actual, the plaintiff must demonstrate "a high degree of probability of inevitable disclosure. . . . Mere knowledge of a trade secret is not enough, even where the person with such knowledge takes a comparable position with a competitor." Katch, LLC v. Sweetser, 2015 WL 6942132 (D. Minn. Nov. 10, 2015); see also Archer Daniels Midland Co. v. Sinele, 139 N.E.3d 1036, 1046 (Ill. Ct. App. 2019) (distinguishing PepsiCo where a sales manager went to a broker rather than to a competing seller); Prime Therapeutics v. Beatty, 354 F.Supp.3d 957 (D. Minn. 2018) (no inevitable disclosure when employee's job for a competitor is somewhat different than the old job).
9. Even states like California that do not recognize the inevitable disclosure doctrine will sometimes enjoin departing employees from working at a new company, but only on a showing that the employee or the new employer actually engaged in conduct making trade secret misappropriation likely. Thus, in the high-profile lawsuit between Google (Waymo) and Uber over self-driving cars, Anthony Levandowski, the former head of Waymo's self-driving car division, was ordered not to work at Uber on the same parts of the project he worked on for Waymo and was eventually fired. See Aaron Marxhall, Uber and Waymo Abruptly Settle For $245 Million, WIRED (Feb. 9, 2019). The court ordered Levandowski to pay $179 million and the U.S. Attorney filed criminal trade secret and other charges. Levandowski ultimately pled guilty. See Reed Albergotti, Ex-Uber executive Anthony Levandowski pleads guilty to trade-secret theft, WASH. POST (Mar. 19, 2020).

# PROBLEM 11-19 

You have been offered a position with a high-technology start-up company. They ask you to sign the following agreement. Do you sign it? Is it enforceable?

## EMPLOYMENT, CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION, AND INVENTION ASSIGNMENT AGREEMENT

As a condition of my employment with Science Company, its subsidiaries, affiliates, successors, or assigns (together the "Company"), and in consideration of my employment with the Company and my receipt of the compensation now and hereafter paid to me by the Company, I agree to the following:

## 1. Confidential Information

(a) Company Information. I agree at all times during the term of my employment and thereafter, to hold in strictest confidence, and not to use, except for the benefit of the Company, or to disclose to any person, firm, or corporation without written authorization of the Board of Directors of the Company, any Confidential Information of the Company. I understand that "Confidential Information" means any Company proprietary information, technical data, trade secrets or know-how, including, but not limited to, research, product plans, products, services, customer lists and customers (including, but not limited to, customers of the Company on whom I called or with whom I became acquainted during the term of my employment), markets, software, developments, inventions, processes, formulas, technology, designs, drawings, engineering, hardware configuration information, marketing, finances, or other business information disclosed to me by the Company either directly or indirectly in writing, orally, or by drawings or observation of parts or equipment. I further understand that Confidential Information does not include any of the foregoing items which has become publicly known and made generally available through no wrongful act of mine or of others who were under confidentiality obligations as to the item or items involved.

## 2. Inventions

I agree that I will promptly make full written disclosure to the Company, will hold in trust for the sole right and benefit of the Company, and hereby assign to the Company, or its designee, all my right, title, and interest in and to any and all inventions, original works of authorship, developments, concepts, improvements or trade secrets, whether or not patentable or registrable under copyright or similar laws, which I may solely or jointly conceive or develop or reduce to practice, or cause to be conceived or developed or reduced to practice (collectively referred to as "Inventions"), during the period of time I am in the employ of the Company and for three months thereafter, except as provided below. I further acknowledge that all original works of authorship which are made by me (solely or jointly with others) within the scope of and during the period of my employment with the Company and which are protectable by copyright are "works made for hire," as that term is defined in the United States Copyright Act.

# 3. Conflicting Employment 

I agree that, during the term of my employment with the Company and for a period of one year thereafter, I will not engage in any other employment, occupation, consulting, or other business activity in competition with or directly related to the business in which the Company is now involved or becomes involved during the term of my employment, nor will I engage in any other activities that conflict with my obligations to the Company.

## 4. Returning Company Documents

I agree that at the time of leaving the employ of the Company, I will deliver to the Company (and will not keep in my possession, recreate or deliver to anyone else) any and all devices, records, data, notes, reports, proposals, lists, correspondence, specifications, drawings, blueprints, sketches, materials, equipment, other documents or property, or reproductions of any aforementioned items developed by me pursuant to my employment with the Company or otherwise belonging to the Company, its successors or assigns.

## 5. Notification to New Employer

In the event that I leave the employ of the Company, I hereby grant consent to notification by the Company to my new employer about my rights and obligations under this Agreement.

## 6. Solicitation of Employees

I agree that for a period of twelve (12) months immediately following the termination of my relationship with the Company for any reason, whether with or without cause, I shall not either directly or indirectly solicit, induce, recruit or encourage any of the Company's employees to leave their employment, or take away such employees, or at- tempt to solicit, induce, recruit, encourage, or take away employees of the Company, either for myself or for any other person or entity.

## G. REMEDIES

As might be expected given the widely varying circumstances surrounding trade secret misappropriation, trade secret law affords courts a broad range of options and discretion for tailoring appropriate remedies. The Uniform Trade Secrets Act sets forth the following remedies for misappropriation:

## Section 2

(a) Actual or threatened misappropriation may be enjoined. Upon application to the court, an injunction shall be terminated when the trade secret has ceased to exist, but the injunction may be continued for an additional reasonable period of time in order to eliminate commercial advantage that otherwise would be derived from the misappropriation.
(b) If the court determines that it would be unreasonable to prohibit future use, an injunction may condition future use upon payment of a reasonable royalty for no longer than the period of time the use could have been prohibited.
(c) In appropriate circumstances, affirmative acts to protect a trade secret may be compelled by court order.

# Section 3 

(a) In addition to or in lieu of injunctive relief, a complainant may recover damages for the actual loss caused by misappropriation. A complainant also may recover for the unjust enrichment caused by misappropriation that is not taken into account in computing damages for actual loss.
(b) If willful and malicious misappropriation exists, the court may award exemplary damages in an amount not exceeding twice any award made under subsection (a).

## Section 4

If (i) a claim of misappropriation is made in bad faith, (ii) a motion to terminate an injunction is made or resisted in bad faith, or (iii) willful and malicious misappropriation exists, the court may award reasonable attorney's fees to the prevailing party.
What motivates this range of remedial measures? As we shall see in the chapters to come, most intellectual property statutes operate on the basis of "property rules." That is, as in cases involving real property, the owner of the intellectual property right is entitled to judicial assistance in protecting the right from future interference. Normally, this assistance comes in the form of injunctive relief. By contrast, most tort and contract cases do not involve injunctive relief but rather damages designed to make the plaintiff "whole" in the sense of restoring her to the position she occupied before the tort, or to the position she expected to occupy if the contract had been performed.

Section 2 of the Uniform Trade Secrets Act seems to entitle trade secret plaintiffs to property-like protection, at least so long as their secret remains a secret. But §2 (b) holds open the possibility that courts may refuse to grant such an injunction, settling instead for a reasonable "royalty" (presumably a court's attempt to approximate what the parties might have agreed to pay in a licensing transaction). This provision casts some doubt on the "property entitlement" a trade secret owner might expect.

Similar doubt pervades the provisions on damages. Concepts like "reasonable royalty," "lost profits," and limited-time injunctions designed to "eliminate commercial advantage" all sound like measures aimed at making the plaintiff whole after a loss without necessarily punishing or deterring the defendant. But further provisions permit trade secret plaintiffs to recover for "unjust enrichment" on the part of defendants, and to recover treble damages and attorney fees in the case of willful misappropriation. Those provisions are more focused on deterring defendants. And in some circumstances misappropriation of trade secrets can be a criminal offense, an idea that is certainly more consistent with a property entitlement rule than a tort or contract rule.
# 1. Injunctions 

Injunctions are commonly ordered in trade secret cases, although their scope and duration are typically tailored based on the circumstances. Since injunctions offer only prospective relief, however, damages for pre-injunction activities may also be collected. Since, unlike patents and copyrights, trade secrets have no definite term, the length of the injunction is often a difficult issue. The following case illustrates the use of one important measure of trade secret injunctions, the "head start" theory.

## Winston Research Corp. v. 3M Corp <br> United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit 350 F.2d 134 (9th Cir. 1965)

## BROWNING, CIRCUIT JUDGE.

For some uses of precision tape recorder/reproducers, the time interval between coded signals must be recorded and reproduced with great accuracy. To accomplish this, the tape must move at as constant a speed as possible during both recording and reproduction, and any changes in tape speed during recording must be duplicated as nearly as possible during reproduction. The degree to which a particular tape recorder/reproducer accomplishes, this result is measured by its "time-displacement error."

An electronic device known as a "servo" system is commonly used to reduce time displacement error by detecting fluctuations in tape speed and immediately adjusting the speed of the motor. Machines prior to the Mincom machine employed a flywheel to inhibit fluctuation in tape speed by increasing the inertia of the system. However, the flywheel reduced the effectiveness of the servo system since the increased inertia prevented rapid adjustments in the speed of the motor.

The effectiveness of the servo system in prior machines was also reduced by resonances created by the moving parts. The range of sensitivity of the servo system was limited to exclude the frequencies of the interfering resonances. This had the disadvantage of limiting the capacity of the servo system to respond to a full range of variations in the speed of the tape.

To solve these problems Mincom eliminated the flywheel and reduced the mass of all other rotating parts. This reduced the inertia of the tape transport system, permitting rapid adjustments in tape speed. Interfering resonances were eliminated by mechanical means. This permitted use of a servo system sensitive to a wide range of frequencies, and hence capable of rapid response to a wide range of variations in tape speed. After four years of research and development based upon this approach, Mincom produced a successful machine with an unusually low time-displacement error.

In May 1962, when Mincom had substantially completed the research phase of its program and was beginning the development of a production prototype, Johnson, who was in charge of Mincom's program, left Mincom's employment. He joined Tobias, who had previously been discharged as Mincom's sales manager, in forming Winston Research Corporation. In late 1962, Winston contracted with the government to develop a precision tape reproducer. Winston hired many of the technicians who had participated in the development of the Mincom machine to work on the design and development of the Winston machine.

In approximately fourteen months, Winston completed a machine having the same low time-displacement error as the Mincom machine.

Conflicting policy considerations come into play in deciding what limitations should be imposed upon an employee in the use and disclosure of information acquired in the course of a terminated employment relationship-or, conversely, what protection should be extended to the former employer against use and disclosure of such information.

On the one hand, restrictions upon the use and disclosure of such information limit the employee's employment opportunities, tie him to a particular employer, and weaken his bargaining power with that employer. Such restrictions interfere with the employee's movement to the job in which he may most effectively use his skills. They inhibit an employee from either setting up his own business or from adding his strength to a competitor of his employer, and thus they diminish potential competition. Such restrictions impede the dissemination of ideas and skills throughout industry. The burdens that they impose upon the employee and society increase in proportion to the significance of the employee's accomplishments, and the degree of his specialization.

On the other hand, restrictions upon an employee's disclosure of information that was developed as a result of the employer's initiative and investment, and which was entrusted to the employee in confidence, are necessary to the maintenance of decent standards of morality in the business community. Unless protection is given against unauthorized disclosure of confidential business information by employees, employeeemployer relationships will be demoralized; employers will be compelled to limit communication among employees with a consequent loss in efficiency; and business, espionage, deceit, and fraud among employers will be encouraged. . . .
. . [S]tate law protecting trade secrets cannot be based "on a policy of rewarding or otherwise encouraging the development of secret processes or devices. The protection is merely against breach of faith and reprehensible means of learning another's secret." RESTATEMENT, TORTS §757, comment b.

The district court found, and Winston concedes, that Johnson and the other former Mincom employees based Winston's development program upon the same approach to the problem of achieving a low time-displacement error as they had pursued in developing the Mincom machine. The district court further found that this general approach was not a trade secret of Mincom's. Finally, the district court found that the particular embodiment of these general concepts in the Mincom machine was Mincom's trade secret, and had been improperly utilized by the former Mincom employees in developing the Winston machine.
[The court affirmed the district court's finding that Winston had misappropriated Mincom's trade secrets.]

The district court enjoined Winston Research Corporation, Johnson, and Tobias from disclosing or using Mincom's trade secrets in any manner for a period of two years from the date of judgment. The court also required the assignment of certain patent applications to Mincom. No damages were awarded. . . . Mincom argues that the injunction should have been permanent, or at least for a substantially longer period. Winston contends that no injunctive relief was appropriate.

Mincom was, of course, entitled to protection of its trade secrets for as long as they remained secret. The district court's decision to limit the duration of injunctive relief was necessarily premised upon a determination that Mincom's trade secrets would shortly be fully disclosed, through no fault of Winston, as a result of public announcements, demonstrations, and sales and deliveries of Mincom machines. Mincom has not seriously challenged this implicit finding, and we think the record fully supports it. . . .

We think the district court's approach was sound. A permanent injunction would subvert the public's interest in allowing technical employees to make full use of their knowledge and skill and in fostering research and development. On the other hand, denial of any injunction at all would leave the faithless employee unpunished where, as here, no damages were awarded; and he and his new employer would retain the benefit of a headstart over legitimate competitors who did not have access to the trade secrets until they were publicly disclosed. By enjoining use of the trade secrets for the approximate period it would require a legitimate Mincom competitor to develop a successful machine after public disclosure of the secret information, the district court denied the employees any advantage from their faithlessness, placed Mincom in the position it would have occupied if the breach of confidence had not occurred prior to the public disclosure, and imposed the minimum restraint consistent with the realization of these objectives upon the utilization of the employees' skills. . . .

Winston also challenges the district court's determination that "knowledge of the reasons for" the particular specifications of the Mincom machine, and "knowledge of what not to do . . . and how not to make the same mistakes" as Mincom had made in arriving at these specifications, were Mincom trade secrets. Although we agree with the district court's conclusion that such "negative know-how" is a trade secret, in the circumstances of this case we can see no way to prohibit Mincom's former employees from using such knowledge without prohibiting them from using their general knowledge and experience at the same time. In an appropriate case, this kind of knowledge can be protected by an injunction or even an award of damages, but this is not such a case. . . .

Mincom argues that the district court should have awarded money damages as well as injunctive relief. We think the district court acted well within its discretion in declining to do so. Since Winston sold none of its machines, it had no profits to disgorge. The evidence as to possible future profits was at best highly speculative. To enjoin future sales and at the same time make an award based on future profits from the prohibited sales would result in duplicative and inconsistent relief, and the choice that the district court made between these mutually exclusive alternatives was not an unreasonable one. There was evidence that Winston would probably sell its machine and realize profits after the injunction expired, but these sales and profits, as we have seen, would not be tainted by breach of confidence, since Winston could by that time have developed its machine from publicly disclosed information. . . .
[Judgment affirmed.]

# COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS 

1. Since the Supreme Court's decision in eBay, Inc. v. MercExchange LLC, 547 U.S. 388 (2006), the general rule in patent and copyright cases has been that injunctive is not automatic; rather, courts apply a four-factor balancing test that asks whether the plaintiff will be irreparably injured absent an injunction, whether the grant or denial of an injunction would impose more hardship, and where the public interest lies. Because the public disclosure of a trade secret can destroy the secret altogether, courts and commentators have traditionally thought injunctions appropriate to prevent an injury that truly is irreparable. But in the wake of eBay some courts have denied injunctive relief. See, e.g., Faiveley Transport Malmo AB v. Wabtec Corp., 559 F.3d 110 (2d Cir. 2009); First Western Capital v. Malamed, 874 F.3d 1136 (10th Cir. 2017) (no presumption of irreparable injury, and no preliminary injunction without proof of irreparable injury); Tribal Sols. Grp. v. Valandra, 2023 WL 7314308 (5th Cir. Nov. 6, 2023); Am. Airlines, Inc. v. Imhof, 620 F.Supp.2d 574 (S.D.N.Y. 2009) (refusing to presume irreparable injury; plaintiff did not show that the defendant was likely to disclose the documents he took to his new employer).

Should there be a presumption that injunctive relief is appropriate? Such a presumption is typical of cases involving real property, but no such rule exists in most tort cases, and certainly not in typical contract cases. Are damages sufficient to protect trade secret owners? It would seem not, since trade secrets are often hard to value, and misappropriation by one party can destroy the secret altogether. On the other hand, the parties in most states could contract for injunctive relief, at least in employment cases, using noncompetition or confidentiality agreements. Should the law impose obligations the parties have not undertaken voluntarily? See East v. Aqua Gaming Inc., 805 So.2d 932 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 2001) (affirming injunction against use of trade secrets, but vacating injunction that prevented competition in the absence of an enforceable noncompete agreement).

One problem with such "automatic" injunctive relief is that it is difficult-and costly-to enforce. Is it an appropriate use of judicial resources to supervise employeremployee relationships on an ongoing basis? Is there a more cost-effective alternative to such supervision?
2. "Head-start injunctions" like the one in Winston are available to plaintiffs who have published or otherwise disclosed their secret at some point after it was misappropriated. Suppose Anne possesses a secret that she is in the process of commercializing. Suppose further that it takes Anne two years after developing the secret to bring the product to market, at which point the secret is disclosed. If Benjamin steals Anne's idea during the development process (say, after one year), Benjamin will be able to get to market one year earlier than if he had waited until the information became public. In such a case, courts will issue a "head-start" injunction for a period of one year, putting Benjamin in the same position he would have been in without the secret. See, e.g., Verigy US Inc. v. Mayder, 2008 WL 564634 (N.D. Cal. Feb. 29, 2008) (granting a five-month injunction to account for the lag time defendant would have faced in getting to market absent misappropriation). As one court explained, The inquiry into a proper "head-start period" is a practical inquiry focused on ensuring that one who prematurely used secret information gains no unfair advantage in the competitive marketplace-no "'head start' on the competition"-from that premature use. The Texas Supreme Court long ago made clear that the period to be identified is the period of the misappropriator's "marketing advantage or head start as compared to the [plaintiff] or any manufacturer or processor" who properly got the information. Hyde, 314 S.W.2d at 773; see id. at 778 (stressing focus on "economic equality"); see also Halliburton Energy, 444 S.W.3d at 257-60 (explaining that a competitive advantage is to be evaluated in the context of the industry and how a competitor could have properly obtained the advantage). The inquiry in this context reflects the "fundamental principle of corrective remedies that is used throughout the law": Restore the parties to the position they would have occupied in the absence of the wrong.
AMS-Osram USA Inc. v. Renesas Elecs. Am., 113 F.4th 1337, 1348-49 (Fed. 2025).
3. Should the idea of "head start" injunctions apply to noncompete agreements as well as trade secret misappropriation? In EMC Corp. v. Arturi, 655 F.3d 75 (1st Cir. 2011), Justice Souter, sitting by designation, held that the plaintiff could not extend a noncompete agreement beyond its expiration date, even if the court had not enforced the agreement pending litigation by issuing a preliminary injunction.

If an employee agrees not to compete for a year, and it takes more than a year for the court to decide that agreement is enforceable, what is the plaintiff's remedy? How would damages be calculated in such a case?
4. In Kewanee Oil Co. v. Bicron Corp., 416 U.S. 470, 473 (1974), the former employees had signed confidentiality agreements. The Court upheld the district court's granting of a permanent injunction against the disclosure or use by respondents of 20 of the 40 claimed trade secrets until such time as the trade secrets had been released to the public, had otherwise generally become available to the public, or had been obtained by respondents from sources having the legal right to convey the information. Id. at 47374. See also Henry Hope X-Ray Prods., Inc. v. Marron Carrel, Inc., 674 F.2d 1336, 1342 (9th Cir. 1982) (the limitation on confidential information contains the implicit temporal limitation that information may be disclosed when it ceases to be confidential).

Most courts have held that an indefinite injunction that extends beyond the head start period is inappropriate. See Texas Advanced Optoelectronic v. Renesas Elecs. Am., 888 F.3d 1322, 1336 (Fed. Cir. 2018); Howard Schultz \& Assocs. v. Broniec, 239 Ga. 181, 236 S.E.2d 265, 270 (1977) ("The nondisclosure covenant here contains no time limitation and hence it is unenforceable"); Gary Van Zeeland Talent, Inc. v. Sandas, 54 Wis. 2d 202, 267 N.W.2d 242, 250 (1978) (unlimited duration of agreement not to disclose trade secret customer list makes the agreement per se void). The Eighth Circuit in Sigma Chemical Co. v. Harris, 794 F.2d 371, 375 (8th Cir. 1986) explained, in the course of rejecting a "temporally unlimited" injunction, the rationale for limiting injunctions in time:
[E]xtending the injunction beyond the time needed for independent development would give the employer "a windfall protection and would subvert the public interest in fostering competition and in allowing employees to make full use of their knowledge and ability."

We believe the part of the injunction prohibiting disclosure of trade secrets must be limited in duration and, accordingly, reverse in part and remand the case to the district court for consideration of the time it would take a "legitimate competitor" to independently reproduce the information contained in the product and vendor files. On remand, the district court should also modify the language of the injunction to expressly state that Harris may use that information which is already in the public domain.
But see Halliburton Energy Servs., Inc. v. Axis Techs., LLC, 444 S.W.3d 251 (Tex. App. 2014) (ordering a perpetual injunction and opining that such perpetual injunctions were the norm). Halliburton represents a decidedly minority view among courts to consider the duration of injunctions. See Richard F. Dole, Jr., Permanent Injunctive Relief for Trade Secret Misappropriation Without an Express Limit upon Its Duration: The Uniform Trade Secrets Act Reconsidered, 17 B.U. J. Sci. \& Tech. L. 173, 191-98 (2011) (collecting cases). The Federal Circuit held in Texas Advanced that the Texas Supreme Court would not apply such a rule.

In addition to limits on time, courts also refuse to grant general "obey the law" injunctions against any misappropriation, instead enjoining only the use or disclosure of specific, identified trade secrets. FED. R. CIV. P. 65(d); Corning, Inc. v. PicVue Elecs., 365 F.3d 156, 157-58 (2d Cir. 2004). Thus, courts have reversed overbroad injunctions that prevented the defendant from using any information obtained from the plaintiff without determining whether the information was in fact a trade secret or merely represented general skill and knowledge the defendant gained on the job. See, e.g., Mallet \& Co. v. Lacayo, 16 F.4th 364 (3d Cir. 2021).
5. Who should be enjoined? Several courts have refused to hold the new employer liable for an employee's malfeasance where they were unaware of it. See Infinity Prods. v. Quandt, 810 N.E.2d 1028 (Ind. 2004) (no respondeat superior liability for trade secret law); BEA Sys. v. WebMethods, Inc., 595 S.E.2d 87 (Ga. Ct. App. 2004).
6. Ex Parte Seizure Orders. While most requests for early equitable relief in trade secret disputes are made on notice pursuant to FED. R. CIV. P. 65, Congress enacted as part of the DTSA a self-contained "civil seizure" provision, patterned on similar language in the Lanham Act, permitting the trade secret owner to seek an ex parte seizure order without notice to the other side to prevent the "propagation or dissemination" of the trade secret in "extraordinary circumstances." 18 U.S.C.
§1836(~b)(2)(A). This portion of the DTSA was also the issue most heavily debated and redrafted in the years leading up to its enactment.

This provision reflects Congress's concerns about cybersecurity and foreign hacking of websites. "The ex parte seizure provision is expected to be used in instances in which a defendant is seeking to flee the country or planning to disclose the trade secret to a third party immediately or is otherwise not amenable to the enforcement of the court's orders." S. Rep. No. 114-220, 114th Cong., 2d Sess., Defend Trade Secrets Act of 2016 9-10 (2016).

The DTSA permits ex parte seizures of trade secret information and evidence of misappropriation where there is some risk that the secrets would be disclosed or the evidence destroyed before a court could enjoin it during normal legal processes. Such ex parte seizures are subject to a number of conditions, limitations, and safeguards, including proof not only that the plaintiff is likely to win the case and meet the requirements for an injunction but also that the normal process of a temporary restraining order is inadequate because the defendant will not comply with it and that the defendant would destroy or hide the evidence if she were given notice of the proposed seizure. See 18 U.S.C. $\S 1836(\mathrm{~b})(\mathrm{A})(\mathrm{ii})$. If seizure is granted, the seizure order must "provide for the narrowest seizure of property necessary" to achieve the purposes of the order and to minimize any interruption of the business operations of third parties and, to the extent possible, the legitimate business operations of the person accused of misappropriation of the trade secret. The party seeking the ex parte seizure order "shall" be required to post security to pay damages that any person may be entitled to recover as a result of a wrongful or excess seizure or attempted seizure. The statute includes additional detailed safeguards, including protecting the party against whom an order is directed from publicity about the order and seizure at the behest of the person obtaining the order, protecting the seized storage medium, protecting the confidentiality of seized materials that are unrelated to the seized trade secret information and, where appropriate, appointing a special master and technical experts not controlled by or associated with the moving party or its counsel to assist in taking control of the seized material. See 18 U.S.C. $\S 1836(\mathrm{~b})(2)(\mathrm{C})-(\mathrm{D})$.

# 2. Damages and Disgorgement 

The UTSA provides for damages adequate to compensate for infringement, and in addition for the disgorgement of defendant's profits from misappropriation to the extent they are not taken into account in the damages award. Both damages and profits must, however, be limited to losses suffered during the head start period, before the defendant could have lawfully obtained or developed the secret. See Texas Advanced Optoelectronic v. Renesas Elecs. Am., 888 F.3d 1322, 1336 (Fed. Cir. 2018).

Damages. A plaintiff is entitled to recover as damages any economic losses they suffer as a result of the infringement. Those may include lost sales to a competitor or the loss of the value of the secret itself. And it can extend extraterritorially to sales lost abroad as a result of trade secret theft in the U.S. See Motorola Solutions, Inc. v. Hytera Comm'ns, 108 F.4th 458 (7th Cir. 2024). But the plaintiff must prove that harm; it is not enough to speculate that the plaintiff would have succeeded in a new market but for the infringer's competition. See Geometwatch Corp. v. Behunin, 38 F.4th 1183, 1205 (10th Cir. 2022); Pegasystems Inc. v. Appian Corp., 904 S.E.2d 247 (Va. App. 2024) (reversing $2 billion trade secrets verdict because plaintiff relied on defendant's total sales but could not prove that the misappropriation caused those sales). While the plaintiff whose secret is disclosed and therefore destroyed by the defendant can recover the value of the secret as a whole, plaintiff can recover the value of the trade secret only if the defendant's acts destroyed the secret. See Syntel Sterling Best Shores Mauritius Ltd. v. The Trizetto Group, 68 F.4th 792 (2d Cir. 2023); Airfacts, Inc. v. Amezaga, 30 F.4th 359 (4th Cir. 2022).

Disgorgement. Plaintiffs can also obtain disgorgement of the defendant's gains from misappropriation to the extent they aren't already counted in plaintiff's losses. Disgorgement is designed to deter misappropriation by depriving the defendant of ill-gotten gains, even if those gains exceed what the plaintiff itself could have made. Like injunctions, disgorgement is limited to the period of time during which the defendant had the secret unlawfully; it ends when the secret becomes public or the defendant successfully reverse-engineers it. See AMS-Osram USA Inc. v. Renesas Elecs. Am., 133 F.4th 1337, 1348-51 (Fed. Cir. 2025).

A jury trial may be available on the damages claim, but disgorgement is an equitable remedy that is decided by a judge. See Texas Advanced Optoelectronic Sols. v. Renesas Elecs Am., 895 F.3d 1304, 1337-44 (Fed. Cir. 2018).

By contrast, New York, the only state that follows the Restatement rather than the UTSA, has held that disgorgement of defendant's profits from infringement is not an available remedy. See E.J. Brooks Co. v. Cambridge Security Seals, 31 N.Y.3d 441 (Ct. App. N.Y. 2018).

Royalties. Even if an injunction is impossible and the plaintiff can't show lost profits, courts may allow the defendant to continue using the former secret but require them to pay a "reasonable royalty." The reasonable royalty is set by the court in an effort to approximate the royalty the trade secret owner might have charged in a voluntary transaction. That in turn is based on the value the defendant obtained from using the secret. See PPG Indus. Inc. v. Jiangsu Tie Mao Glass Co., 47 F.4th 156, 162 (3d Cir. 2022).

Is a reasonable royalty a fair solution in such a situation? See Mid-Michigan Comp. Sys. v. Marc Glassman Inc., 416 F.3d 505 (6th Cir. 2005) (basing damages for misappropriation of computer software on a reasonable royalty). At least one commentator has suggested that such a remedy "is peculiarly inappropriate to redress a situation where injunctive relief ought to be applied." See 12 Roger Milgrim, Milgrim on Trade Secrets §1.01[2][a], at 1-36 n. 20 (citing a district court decision concluding that limiting relief to a reasonable royalty invites misappropriation).

Is a reasonable royalty always appropriate in the absence of an injunction, even if there is no evidence that the plaintiff lost money (or the defendant gained it) as a result of the misappropriation? In Ajaxo Inc. v. E*Trade Fin. Corp., 115 Cal.Rptr.3d 168 (Ct.
App. 2010), the court held that it was error to refuse to award a reasonable royalty where the plaintiff could not prove damages or unjust enrichment. And in Bianco v. Globus Medical, Inc., 53 F.Supp.3d 929 (E.D. Tex. 2014), the court treated a reasonable royalty as the normal remedy for use of a trade secret when the parties are not in competition, just as it is in patent cases. Notably, the Bianco court concluded that the royalty should be paid for fifteen years, well after the secret would have been discovered by independent means, reasoning that when the trade secret owner licensed ideas voluntarily it often signed contracts that required ongoing royalties. See also Airfacts, Inc. v. Amezaga, 30 F.4th 359 (4th Cir. 2022) (holding that a reasonable royalty should be awarded even though the defendant made no commercial use of the secret and merely put it on his resume).

The Seventh Circuit holds that the UTSA's provision of treble damages for misappropriation of trade secrets is unconstitutional, extending a line of tort cases that limits the ratio of punitive to actual damages. See Epic Sys. v. Tata Consultancy Servs., 980 F.3d 1117 (7th Cir. 2020). The court held that punitive damages could not exceed the amount of actual damages (thus permitting doubling but not trebling the award). Curiously, however, the same court later held that the federal DTSA, which has an identical treble damages provision, was not unconstitutional. See Motorola Solutions, Inc. v. Hytera Comm'ns, 108 F.4th 458 (7th Cir. 2024).

# 3. State Criminal Trade Secret Statutes 

Misappropriation of trade secrets is not only a tort; in some circumstances, it is a crime. A series of well-publicized criminal prosecutions of computer executives accused of taking trade secrets to their new employers have raised the consciousness of industry professionals about trade secrets. The prosecutions have also raised ethical and political questions about the propriety of trade secret prosecutions "engineered" by the real parties in interest, often major companies such as Intel or Borland.

Criminal trade secret cases differ from civil ones in several respects. The complaining party is the government, rather than the injured company. However, the injured companies are the "real parties in interest" and usually have some presence in the case. Even though they are not parties to the criminal proceeding, they at least supply a significant number of the witnesses and enjoy a high level of communication with the district attorney.

The burden of proof is higher than in a civil case. Some cases that could be won by the plaintiffs as civil cases will be lost in criminal court. This situation is even more likely because several states have definitions of trade secrets in their criminal laws that are more limited than their civil counterparts. For example, CAL. PENAL CODE §499c, which governs theft of trade secrets, historically limited the definition of a trade secret to "scientific or technical" information. (The constitutionality of this definition of trade secrets was upheld against a vagueness attack in People v. Serrata, 133 Cal. Rptr. 144 (Ct. App. 1976).) But in 1996, the California legislature amended its criminal trade secret statute to be coextensive with the broader definition of trade secrets in the Uniform Trade Secrets Act.
Defendants accused of stealing trade secrets may be charged with other offenses as well. For example, defendants who acquire a secret through improper means, as opposed to acquisition in a confidential relationship, may be guilty of larceny, receiving stolen property, or a host of similar crimes. See People v. Gopal, 217 Cal.Rptr. 487, 493-94 (Ct. App. 1985). Further, the growth of computer technology has expanded the federal role in prosecuting theft of trade secrets, since data taken over a computer network is considered to cross state lines. See United States v. Riggs, 739 F.Supp. 414 (N.D. Ill. 1990) (allowing indictment of computer hackers who published data from a Bell South computer text file for wire fraud and interstate transportation of stolen property).

The prosecution of a criminal (rather than civil) trade secret case has other effects on the parties involved. First, criminal trade secret courtrooms are the scene of constant battles over the publication of information. The real parties in interest will naturally oppose the disclosure in a public courtroom of the very secrets the defendant is accused of stealing. This concern runs headlong into the defendant's constitutional right to a public trial. ^8 Second, civil cases are generally stayed pending the outcome of a criminal prosecution. Thus, a criminal prosecution may actually delay injunctive relief-the kind of remedy a civil plaintiff is often most interested in.

# COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS 

1. Given the stay imposed on a parallel civil action and the higher burden of proof in a criminal case, why would a civil plaintiff ever seek a criminal prosecution?
2. Should theft of trade secrets be a criminal offense? Does the presence of criminal sanctions have any effect on the optimal level of deterrence provided in damages suits, and therefore on the damages that should be awarded in a civil suit?

Do you see any problems with California's inclusion of business information in the criminal trade secret statute? Are there reasons to treat theft of scientific information more harshly than theft of business information?

## 4. Federal Criminal Trade Secret Liability

The Economic Espionage Act, enacted in 1996, imposes criminal liability for trade secret misappropriation. The EEA is divided into two sections: one focused on foreign espionage and the other applying generally. Section 1831 punishes the theft or misappropriation of a trade secret when undertaken by anyone "intending or knowing that the offense will benefit any foreign government, foreign instrumentality or foreign agent." 18 U.S.C. §1831 (a). This prohibition targets foreign business espionage. To establish a violation of §1831, the government must prove that: (1) the defendant stole or without authorization of the owner, obtained, possessed destroyed, or conveyed information; (2) the defendant knew this information was proprietary; (3) the information was in fact a trade secret; and (4) the defendant intended or knew that the offense would "benefit" a "foreign government, foreign instrumentality or foreign agent."

Section 1832 is a general criminal trade secrets provision and applies to anyone who knowingly engages in any misappropriation of a trade secret. To establish a violation of §1832, the government must prove:
(1) that the defendant intended to convert proprietary information to the economic benefit of anyone other than the owner; (2) that the proprietary information was a trade secret; (3) that the defendant knowingly stole, copied, possessed or received trade secret information; (4) that the defendant intended or knew the offense would injure the owner of the trade secret; and (5) that the trade secret was included in a product that is placed in interstate commerce.
United States v. Wen Chyu Liu, 716 F.3d 159, 169 (5th Cir. 2013).
By contrast to civil trade secret liability but in line with nearly all criminal statutes, both §1831(a)(4) and §1832(a)(4) also prohibit "attempts to commit any offense described in any of paragraphs (1) through (3)." See United States v. Lange, 312 F.3d 263 (7th Cir. 2002) (affirming guilty verdict on defendant even if he did not have real trade secrets in his possession because he thought that he did and took a substantial affirmative act (attempted sale) toward completion of the offense).

# H. FEDERAL PREEMPTION 

The Supremacy Clause of the U.S. Constitution provides that This Constitution, and the Laws of the United States which shall be made in Pursuance thereof; and all Treaties made, or which shall be made, under the Authority of the United States, shall be the supreme Law of the Land; and the Judges in every State shall be bound thereby, any Thing [sic] in the Constitution or Laws of any State to the Contrary notwithstanding.
U.S. Const., Art. VI, Cl. 2. Thus, the Supremacy Clause nullifies state law attempts to duplicate or interfere with federal intellectual property protection. More difficult cases involve state laws that do not directly conflict with federal authority but instead address interstitial gaps within the federal regime. Courts must grapple with whether Congress intended to leave such gaps unfilled, thereby precluding state protection, or simply allowed state law to fill these voids. The following case addressed the interplay of federal patent law and state trade secret protection.

## Kewanee Oil Co. v. Bicron Corp. Supreme Court of the United States 416 U.S. 470 (1974)

Mr. Chief Justice Burger delivered the opinion of the Court.
We granted certiorari to resolve a question on which there is a conflict in the courts of appeals: whether state trade secret protection is pre-empted by operation of the federal patent law. In the instant case the Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit held that there was preemption. The Courts of Appeals for the Second, Fourth, Fifth, and Ninth Circuits have reached the opposite conclusion. . . .

Petitioner brought this diversity action in United States District Court for the Northern District of Ohio seeking injunctive relief and damages for the misappropriation of trade secrets. The district Court, applying Ohio trade secret law, granted a permanent injunction against the disclosure or use by respondents of 20 of the 40 claimed trade secrets until such time as the trade secrets had been released to the public, had otherwise generally become available to the public, or had been obtained by respondents from sources having the legal right to convey the information.

The Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit held that the findings of fact by the District Court were not clearly erroneous, and that it was evident from the record that the individual respondents appropriated to the benefit of Bicron secret information on processes obtained while they were employees at Harshaw. Further, the Court of Appeals held that the District Court properly applied Ohio law relating to trade secrets. Nevertheless, the Court of Appeals reversed the District Court, finding Ohio's trade secret law to be in conflict with the patent laws of the United States. The Court of Appeals reasoned that Ohio could not grant monopoly protection to processes and manufacturing techniques that were appropriate subjects for consideration under 35 U.S.C. §101 for a federal patent but which had been in commercial use for over one year and so were no longer eligible for patent protection under 35 U.S.C. §102(b).

We hold that Ohio's law of trade secrets is not preempted by the patent laws of the United States, and accordingly, we reverse. . . .

# III. 

The first issue we deal with is whether the States are forbidden to act at all in the area of protection of the kinds of intellectual property which may make up the subject matter of trade secrets.

ARTICLE I, §8, CL. 8, of the CONSTITUTION grants to the Congress the power [t]o promote the Progress of Science and useful Arts, by securing for limited Times to Authors and Inventors the exclusive Right to their respective Writings and Discoveries. . . .
In the 1972 Term, in Goldstein v. California, 412 U.S. 546 (1973), we held that the CL. 8 grant of power to Congress was not exclusive and that, at least in the case of writings, the States were not prohibited from encouraging and protecting the efforts of those within their borders by appropriate legislation. The States could, therefore, protect against the unauthorized rerecording for sale of performances fixed on records or tapes, even though those performances qualified as "writings" in the constitutional sense and Congress was empowered to legislate regarding such performances and could pre-empt the area if it chose to do so. This determination was premised on the great diversity of interests in our Nation-the essentially nonuniform character of the appreciation of intellectual achievements in the various States. Evidence for this came from patents granted by the States in the 18th century. 412 U.S., at 557.
Just as the States may exercise regulatory power over writings so may the States regulate with respect to discoveries. States may hold diverse viewpoints in protecting intellectual property relating to invention as they do in protecting the intellectual property relating to the subject matter of copyright. The only limitation on the States is that in regulating the area of patents and copyrights they do not conflict with the operation of the laws in this area passed by Congress, and it is to that more difficult question we now turn.

# IV. 

The question of whether the trade secret law of Ohio is void under the Supremacy Clause involves a consideration of whether that law "stands as an obstacle to the accomplishment and execution of the full purposes and objectives of Congress." Hines v. Davidowitz, 312 U.S. 52, 67 (1941). See Florida Avocado Growers v. Paul, 373 U.S. 132, 141 (1963). We stated in Sears, Roebuck \& Co. v. Stiffel Co., 376 U.S. 225, 229 (1964), that when state law touches upon the area of federal statutes enacted pursuant to constitutional authority, "it is 'familiar doctrine' that the federal policy 'may not be set at naught, or its benefits denied' by the state law. Sola Elec. Co v. Jefferson Elec. Co., 317 U.S. 173, 176 (1942). This is true, of course, even if the state law is enacted in the exercise of otherwise undoubted state power." . . .

The stated objective of the Constitution in granting the power to Congress to legislate in the area of intellectual property is to "promote the Progress of Science and useful Arts." The patent laws promote this progress by offering a right of exclusion for a limited period as an incentive to inventors to risk the often enormous costs in terms of time, research, and development. . . .

The maintenance of standards of commercial ethics and the encouragement of invention are the broadly stated policies behind trade secret law. "The necessity of good faith and honest, fair dealing, is the very life and spirit of the commercial world." . . .

As we noted earlier, trade secret law protects items which would not be proper subjects for consideration for patent protection under 35 U.S.C. §101. As in the case of the recordings in Goldstein v. California, Congress, with respect to nonpatentable subject matter, "has drawn no balance; rather, it has left the area unattended, and no reason exists why the State should not be free to act." Goldstein v. California, supra, at 570 (footnote omitted).

Since no patent is available for a discovery, however useful, novel, and nonobvious, unless it falls within one of the express categories of patentable subject matter of 35 U.S.C. §101, the holder of such a discovery would have no reason to apply for a patent whether trade secret protection existed or not. Abolition of trade secret protection would, therefore, not result in increased disclosure to the public of discoveries in the area of nonpatentable subject matter. . . .

Congress has spoken in the area of those discoveries which fall within one of the categories of patentable subject matter of 35 U.S.C. §101 and which are, therefore, of a nature that would be subject to consideration for a patent. Processes, machines, manufactures, compositions of matter, and improvements thereof, which meet the tests of utility, novelty, and nonobviousness are entitled to be patented, but those which do not, are not. The question remains whether those items which are proper subjects for consideration for a patent may also have available the alternative protection accorded by trade secret law.

Certainly the patent policy of encouraging invention is not disturbed by the existence of another form of incentive to invention. In this respect the two systems are not and never would be in conflict. Similarly, the policy that matter once in the public domain must remain in the public domain is not incompatible with the existence of trade secret protection. By definition a trade secret has not been placed in the public domain.
. . . Trade secret law will encourage invention in areas where patent law does not reach, and will prompt the independent innovator to proceed with the discovery and exploitation of his invention. Competition is fostered and the public is not deprived of the use of valuable, if not quite patentable, invention. . . .

The final category of patentable subject matter to deal with is the clearly patentable invention, i.e., that invention which the owner believes to meet the standards of patentability. It is here that the federal interest in disclosure is at its peak. . . .

Trade secret law provides far weaker protection in many respects than the patent law. While trade secret law does not forbid the discovery of the trade secret by fair and honest means, e.g., independent creation or reverse engineering, patent law operates "against the world," forbidding any use of the invention for whatever purpose for a significant length of time. The holder of a trade secret also takes a substantial risk that the secret will be passed on to his competitors, by theft or by breach of a confidential relationship, in a manner not easily susceptible of discovery or proof. Painton \& Co. v. Bourns, Inc., 442 F.2d, at 224. Where patent law acts as a barrier, trade secret law functions relatively as a sieve. The possibility that an inventor who believes his invention meets the standards of patentability will sit back, rely on trade secret law, and after one year of use forfeit any right to patent protection, 35 U.S.C. §102(~b), is remote indeed.

Nor does society face much risk that scientific or technological progress will be impeded by the rare inventor with a patentable invention who chooses trade secret protection over patent protection. The ripeness-of-time concept of invention, developed from the study of the many independent multiple discoveries in history, predicts that if a particular individual had not made a particular discovery others would have, and in probably a relatively short period of time. If something is to be discovered at all very likely it will be discovered by more than one person. . . .
. . . Trade secret law and patent law have co-existed in this country for over one hundred years. Each has its particular role to play, and the operation of one does not take away from the need for the other. . . . Congress, by its silence over these many years, has seen the wisdom of allowing the States to enforce trade secret protection. Until Congress takes affirmative action to the contrary, States should be free to grant protection to trade secrets. . . .
Mr. Justice Douglas, with whom Mr. Justice Brennan concurs, dissenting.
Today's decision is at war with the philosophy of Sears, Roebuck \& Co. v. Stiffel Co., 376 U.S. 225, and Compco Corp. v. Day-Brite Lighting, Inc., 376 U.S. 234. Those cases involved patents-one of a pole lamp and one of fluorescent lighting fixtureseach of which was declared invalid. The lower courts held, however, that though the patents were invalid the sale of identical or confusingly similar products to the products of the patentees violated state unfair competition laws. We held that when an article is unprotected by a patent, state law may not forbid others to copy it, because every article not covered by a valid patent is in the public domain. Congress in the patent laws decided that where no patent existed, free competition should prevail; that where a patent is rightfully issued, the right to exclude others should obtain for no longer than 17 years, and that the States may not "under some other law, such as that forbidding unfair competition, give protection of a kind that clashes with the objectives of the federal patent laws," 376 U.S., at 231. . . .

The conflict with the patent laws is obvious. The decision of Congress to adopt a patent system was based on the idea that there will be much more innovation if discoveries are disclosed and patented than there will be when everyone works in secret. Society thus fosters a free exchange of technological information at the cost of a limited 17-year monopoly. . . .

A suit to redress theft of a trade secret is grounded in tort damages for breach of a contract-a historic remedy, Cataphote Corp. v. Hudson, 422 F.2d 1290. Damages for breach of a confidential relation are not pre-empted by this patent law, but an injunction against use is pre-empted because the patent law states the only monopoly over trade secrets that is enforceable by specific performance; and that monopoly exacts as a price full disclosure. A trade secret can be protected only by being kept secret. Damages for breach of a contract are one thing; an injunction barring disclosure does service for the protection accorded valid patents and is therefore pre-empted. . . .

# COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS 

1. The rule set forth by Sears, Roebuck \& Co v. Stiffel Co., 376 U.S. 225 (1964), was fairly clear: patent law reflects a compromise between the goal of promoting innovation and the danger of condoning monopoly. Supplementing the scope of patent law may upset that balance, and is therefore prohibited. Supplementing enforcement of the federal intellectual property laws was condoned in dictum at the end of Compco Corp. v. Day-Brite Lighting, Inc., 376 U.S. 234 (1964), a companion case, and in Justice Harlan's concurrence in both cases. After these cases, state law served a very limited function in the scheme of intellectual property protection. States could work to further the goals of federal protection, but they had to work within the parameters set down by federal law. As a result, both Sears and Compco struck down state statutes providing design protection to unpatentable utilitarian articles.

The Kewanee opinion takes a remarkably different tack. Chief Justice Burger's opinion for the Court emphasizes only one of the two policies shaping the patent laws: the goal of promoting innovation. The opinion does not discuss the dangers intellectual property protection poses for free competition. As a result, the Kewanee Court finds no problem with trade secret protection that extends beyond the scope of the patent laws. Note that the Court seems to approve not only of state laws that protect nonpatentable subject matter (an area in which it could be argued that the federal government has no interest), ^9 but also the protection of inventions not patentable for some other reason (i.e., suppression, misuse, lack of novelty, or obviousness).

Is Kewanee reconcilable with Sears? The Kewanee Court did not overrule Sears or Compco; indeed, it cited them in support of its holding. Thus state laws preventing copying were treated differently from trade secret laws after Kewanee. The latter, although broader in scope (they prevented far more than just outright copying of products), were permissible; the former were not. See Paul Goldstein, Kewanee Oil Co. v. Bicron Corp.: Notes on a Closing Circle, 1974 SUP. CT. REV. 81 (1974) (arguing that Kewanee "closed the circle" on the open-ended preemption analysis of Sears and Compco); Camilla A. Hrdy, State Patents as a Solution to Underinvestment in Innovation, 62 U. KAN. L. REV. 487 (2013) (arguing that state patents, which preceded the adoption of the CONSTITUTION in 1789, are still possible and in some cases desirable despite federal nature of patent law).
2. Is preemption a good idea? That depends on what you think of the balance the federal laws have struck. If you are more concerned about injury to competition by conferring monopoly rights on patentees, you are likely to favor the result in Sears. If, on the other hand, you think that innovation is under-rewarded, it is reasonable to oppose federal preemption. One way to reconcile these cases may be to read Sears and Compco as expressing a federal policy in favor of reverse engineering of products in the public domain. If that is the overarching federal goal, it is logical to strike down the laws in Sears and Compco but not Kewanee, since trade secrets statutes (unlike the unfair competition laws we have discussed) generally allow reverse engineering. This result is also consistent with the reading of trade secret laws as merely an application of tort and contract principles.


^7 Merely memorizing a trade secret rather than taking physical documents will not preclude a finding of misappropriation, though it may make misappropriation harder to detect. See Ed Nowogroski Ins. Inc. v. Rucker, 971 P.2d 936 (Wash. 1999). In Stampede Tool Warehouse Inc. v. May, 651 N.E.2d 209 (Ill. Ct. App. 1995), for example, the plaintiff alleged that former employees who started a competing business had misappropriated its trade secrets by memorizing a list of plaintiff's customers and soliciting those customers. The court found the defendants liable, reasoning that "memorization is one method of misappropriation." But if the case involved merely a former employee contacting those she knew from experience to be potential customers, rather than explicitly attempting to memorize a list of customers, it would be hard to fault the employee's conduct. Cf. Timothy Murphy, Can't Get It Out of My Head: Trade Secrets Liability for Remembered Information, 2023 Wis. L. Rev. 1929 (arguing that some kinds of memorization are accidental and should not be the basis for liability).
^[10] The confidentiality agreement is also not invalid for want of a time limitation. See 765 ILCS 1065/8(b)(1) ("[A] contractual or other duty to maintain secrecy or limit use of a trade secret shall not be deemed to be void or unenforceable solely for lack of durational or geographic limitation on the duty."). Nor is there any question that the confidentiality agreement covers much of the information PepsiCo fears Redmond will necessarily use in his new employment with Quaker.
^8 There is no such right in civil cases. To avoid the very real danger that a misappropriation action will result in disclosure of the very secrets the plaintiff seeks to protect, civil trade secret actions will almost invariably include protective orders limiting the disclosure of information produced in discovery. Such orders are usually agreed to by the parties but may sometimes be imposed by the court. They will sometimes go so far as to prevent the parties themselves (as opposed to the attorneys and hired experts) from reviewing the other side's documents. In such a case, should in-house counsel be given access to discovery documents? See Brown Bag Software v. Symantec Corp., 960 F.2d 1465, 1470 (9th Cir. 1992).
^9 Even in this area, though, a federal interest may be discerned. If Congress has declared some subject matter unpatentable, that could reflect a federal determination that that matter is unworthy of protection, a determination that state law should not be allowed to upset.