
Patent law is the classic example of an intellectual property regime modeled on the utilitarian framework. Following the constitutional authorization to promote progress in the "useful Arts," what we would today call technology and scientific discovery, patent law offers the possibility of a limited period of exclusive rights to encourage research and development aimed at discovering new processes, machines, articles of manufacture, and compositions of matter, and improvements thereof. The public benefits directly through the spur to innovation and disclosure of new technology. After the term of the patent expires, the innovation becomes part of the public domain, freely available to all.
To obtain a utility patent, an inventor must submit an application to the Patent and Trademark Office (PTO) that meets five requirements: patentable subject matter, usefulness, novelty, nonobviousness, and disclosure sufficient to enable others skilled in the art to make and use the invention. While the threshold for usefulness is low, the novelty and non-obviousness standards are substantial, and the PTO conducts an independent review of the application to ensure that it meets these requirements. If the PTO grants the patent, the inventor obtains exclusive rights to make, use, and sell the innovation for a term of up to 20 years from the application filing date. The patent grant is nearly absolute, barring even those who independently develop the invention from practicing its art. Infringement will be found where the accused device, composition, or process embodies all of the elements of a valid patent claim (or accomplishes substantially the same function in substantially the same way to achieve the same result).
