
$$
\text { UPA (1914) } \S \S 29-31,37,38,40,42
$$

UPA (1997) §§105 (c) (9)-(12), 411, 601-603, 701, 801, 802, 806
The law governing a partner's dissociation and the partnership's dissolution is complex and often misunderstood even by experienced practitioners. Therefore, we begin with an examination of the dissolution framework as it applies to the so-called at-will partnership - a partnership formed without agreement that the partnership shall continue for a specified term or undertaking.

Under partnership law norms, the general partnership is an at-will relationship that can continue only as long as every member assents. The at-will characteristic ensures that any partner will be able to adapt to changed circumstances by dissociating from the partnership and redeploying his talents and capital elsewhere. However, a general partnership relationship is more difficult to untangle than the relation of proprietor and agent. The relationship must first be dissolved and then the business of the partnership must be wound up.

In an at-will general partnership, any partner may "dissociate" and thereby cause a "dissolution" of the partnership by simply expressing his will to cease association with the partnership. Under partnership law norms, once dissolution occurs, the partnership must wind up its business, pay off its debts, and settle accounts with partners. This process may be quite lengthy. For example, if the partnership's business is still viable, the partners may wish to continue operating the business until it can be sold to third parties. On the other hand, a partnership might be wound up almost immediately if all partners are in agreement that the partnership's business is to be taken over by a subset of the partners. In any event, as soon as partnership affairs are wound up, the partnership terminates.
Under UPA (1914), upon the non-wrongful dissolution of a partnership, whether caused by a partner's death or dissociation, or otherwise, any partner normally has the right to require that the partnership's assets be liquidated via a judicially supervised auction, with any cash remaining after satisfaction of superior claims being distributed to the partners in accordance with their respective profit shares. However, partners may avoid the normal rule by agreement entered into either before or after dissolution.

Under UPA (1997), any partner normally has the right to require that the partnership's assets be liquidated via a judicially supervised auction only if the partnership is at will and has been dissolved by a partner's expression of will to dissociate. As under UPA (1914), partners may avoid such a forced sale by ex ante or ex post agreement. A partner's death or non-wrongful dissociation by any means other than her expression of will does not give any partner the right to force a liquidating sale as was the case under UPA (1914). Instead, the partnership interest of a deceased or otherwise dissociating partner will be purchased by the partnership for a "buyout price" based on the greater of the partnership's liquidating or going-concern value.

The normal rule found in UPA (1914) and UPA (1997) can be viewed as a device whereby upon dissolution any partner or partner's representative may force a competition for the right to continue the firm, with the winner being the party that submits the highest cash bid at the judicial sale of the partnership's assets. So viewed, the statutory norms reflect a policy judgment that disputes concerning who should continue a partnership's business post-dissolution should be decided by the parties themselves through ex ante or ex post negotiation or, if negotiations fail, in a neutral auction. As you read the following cases, consider to what extent this policy judgment should control judges' discretion.

As the case below reveals, under certain circumstances courts will be tempted to avoid the normal rules of UPA (1914) and UPA (1997) by fashioning a buyout right for the continuing partners not provided by statute or by ordering an in-kind distribution of assets. As you read the following case, consider what interests the judicial and statutory rules are protecting when they choose not to allow liquidation via judicially supervised auction.

# McCormick v. Brevig <br> Supreme Court of Montana, 2004 <br> 96 P.3d 697 

Justice Jim Rice delivered the Opinion of the Court.
This case involves a protracted dispute between a brother and sister concerning their respective interests in a ranching partnership that is before the Court a second time. The litigation began in 1995 when Joan McCormick ("Joan") brought this action against her brother, Clark Brevig ("Clark"), and their Partnership, Brevig Land Live and Lumber (hereinafter, "the Partnership"), seeking a Partnership accounting and dissolution. . . .

A bench trial was held January 18 through 21, 2000. On April 3, 2000, the District Court entered findings of fact and conclusions of law, dissolving the Partnership, and ordering its business wound up, pending a hearing before a special master and a determination of the proper method for dissolution.

A limited accounting by a special master was thereafter performed. On December 27, 2001, the District Court concluded that the parties' Partnership agreement did not apply, and that a judicial dissolution of the Partnership was warranted pursuant to §35-10-624(5), MCA. The court further recognized that §35-10-629, MCA, explicitly required any surplus assets after paying creditors to be paid to the partners in cash in accordance with their right to distribution. Nonetheless, the court found that it would be inequitable to order the liquidation of the Partnership assets in order to satisfy Joan's interest in the Partnership. Therefore, in keeping with its desire to preserve the family farm, the Court ordered Joan to sell her interest in the Partnership to her brother following an appraisal and determination of the value of her share. With the assistance of a special master, and following an accounting of Partnership assets, the District Court eventually fixed a price of $1,107,672 on Joan's 50 percent interest in the Partnership. Joan appeals from the District Court's accounting and order requiring her to sell her interest in the Partnership to her brother, and Clark cross-appeals from the court's determination regarding certain Partnership assets, as well as from an evidentiary ruling made at trial.

We affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand for further proceedings.

# Factual and Procedural Background 

Joan and Clark are the children of Charles and Helen Brevig (hereinafter, "Charles" and "Helen"). In 1960 Charles purchased the Brevig Ranch outside of Lewistown from his parents. In 1971, Charles transferred his sole interest in the ranch by warranty deed to himself and Helen as joint tenants. The following year, Charles and Helen conveyed the ranch to Clark and Helen as joint tenants.

When Charles and Helen divorced in 1977, Helen conveyed her interest in the ranch to Charles in the property settlement agreement. Thereafter, Clark and his father owned the ranch in equal shares, and began operating the ranch as Brevig Land, Live \& Lumber, a partnership, pursuant to a written agreement.

Although she was not a partner in the ranch operation, Joan lived on the ranch and assisted in ranch operations from 1975 until 1981. In 1981, with the ranch facing severe financial hardship, Joan left the ranch to work as an oil and gas "landman," in order to generate outside income to enable the ranch to meet its financial obligations. . . .

In 1982, Charles and Clark sought to refinance the farm debt in the amount of $422,000 with the Federal Land Bank. Because the ranch operation did not generate sufficient cash flow to meet the projected debt payment, the bank required Joan to sign the mortgage which was secured by the ranch real estate. Joan's income as a landman became committed to assist in repayment of the ranch debt.

During the time of Joan's employment as a landman from 1981 through 1986, it was Joan's practice to contribute all of her income, less expenses, to the support of the ranch operation. In 1983, Joan closed her personal bank account and began to deposit all of her income into the partnership bank account. From this account, Joan would pay her personal expenses and the balance would be applied to the obligations of Charles and Clark's partnership. After she married in 1986, Joan made payments directly to the banks for the ranch obligations rather than to deposit the money in the ranch operating account. Joan also made direct payments for taxes and insurance.

On October 28, 1982, Charles died unexpectedly after a short illness. Thereafter, pursuant to Charles' Last Will and Testament, Clark and Joan were appointed co-personal representatives and probated Charles' estate. Clark and Joan each received one-half of Charles' estate, which principally consisted of his 50 percent interest in the ranch and Partnership. As a result of the distributions, Clark then owned 75 percent of the ranch assets, and Joan 25 percent. A written partnership agreement was thereafter executed by Clark and Joan reflecting their respective 75/25 percent interests in the Partnership. Except for these ownership percentages, the written agreement was identical to the one executed between Charles and Clark in 1978.

After Charles' death, Joan continued her work as a landman, and made financial contributions to the new Partnership. She also maintained the Partnership's books and records. Meanwhile, Clark assumed responsibility for the day-to-day affairs of the ranch. Clark and Joan made management decisions together.

In 1984, Joan obtained an additional 25 percent in the Partnership, fully paying for this interest by the following year. . . . From 1984 to 1993, Joan was listed as a 50/50 partner on all the tax returns for the Partnership. . . .

Disagreements concerning management of the ranch, and particularly, management of the debt load on the ranch, caused Clark and Joan's relationship to deteriorate. By the early 1990s, cooperation between Clark and Joan regarding the operation of the ranch and securing of loans necessary to fund the ranch had essentially ceased, and they began looking for ways to dissolve the Partnership.

In 1995, Joan brought suit against Clark and the Partnership, alleging that Clark had converted Partnership assets to his own personal use, and sought an accounting of the Partnership's affairs. She also requested a determination that Clark had engaged in conduct warranting a decree of expulsion. Alternatively, Joan sought an order dissolving and winding up the Partnership. . . .

On April 3, 2000, the District Court issued findings of fact and conclusions of law, finding that neither Clark nor Joan had dissociated from the Partnership, that Joan was a 50 percent partner and should be credited for any excess capital contributions she made to the Partnership, and that Clark was not entitled to receive compensation as a partner. The court further concluded that the Partnership should be dissolved and its business wound up, and reasoned that appointment of a special master was appropriate in order to determine the amount of the parties' respective capital contributions and Partnership assets.

On February 7, 2001, following the appointment and discharge of the two previous masters, Larry Blakely, CPA ("Blakely"), was appointed special master. Blakely was vested with the authority to inquire into all pertinent matters of record and charged with determining the amount, if any, of Joan's excess capital contributions to the Partnership as well as to resolve disputes concerning Partnership assets. . . .

Joan objected to Blakely's report, arguing that he had improperly limited himself to draft and unfiled tax returns previously prepared by Russ Spika, CPA ("Spika"), and had failed to consider evidence which Joan had presented showing significant contributions to the Partnership. Joan further argued that Blakely had failed to follow the historical methods of accounting that had been used by the Partnership up through 1993, which Clark was estopped from challenging pursuant to the court's April 3, 2000 order.

A real estate appraiser was subsequently appointed by the court, and a new series of disputes concerning the appraisal process began. On August 7, 2002, the court entered an order appointing additional real estate appraisers to assist in the appraisal process, and reenlisted the services of special master Blakely to review the revised Partnership income tax returns prepared by Spika for the 1994 through 2001 tax years. . . .

On December 12, 2002, Blakely filed his final report with the court, accepting Spika's tax returns, and valuing Joan's interest in the Partnership at \$795,629. Joan objected to Blakely's findings and a hearing followed. On January 29, 2003, the District Court entered findings of fact and conclusions of law, accepting Blakely's findings and valuing Joan's interest in the Partnership at $\1,107,672. Clark thereafter tendered this amount to Joan for the purchase of her interest, which Joan rejected. This appeal followed.

# Discussion 

After ordering dissolution of the Partnership, did the District Court err by failing to order liquidation of the Partnership assets, and instead granting Clark the right to purchase Joan's Partnership interest at a price determined by the court?

Joan contends that when a partnership is dissolved by judicial decree, Montana's Revised Uniform Partnership Act, § 35-10-101 et seq., MCA (2001), requires liquidation by sale of partnership assets and distribution in cash of any surplus to the partners. In response, Clark asserts that there are other judicially acceptable methods of distributing partnership assets upon dissolution besides liquidating assets through a forced sale. For the reasons set forth below, we conclude that the Revised Uniform Partnership Act requires liquidation of partnership assets and distribution of the net surplus in cash to the partners upon dissolution entered by judicial decree when it is no longer reasonably practicable to carry on the business of the partnership. . . .

Partnership law in Montana and throughout the United States has been primarily derived from the Uniform Partnership Act ("UPA"), which was originally promulgated by the Uniform Law Commissioners in 1914. Under the UPA, the law of partnership breakups was couched in terms of dissolution. A partnership was dissolved and its assets liquidated upon the happening of specific events, the most significant of which was the death of a partner or any partner expressing a will to leave the partnership. Montana adopted the UPA in 1947.

In 1993, our legislature significantly amended the UPA by adopting the Revised Uniform Partnership Act, or RUPA. Unlike the UPA, RUPA now provides two separate tracks for the exiting partner. The first track applies to the dissociating partner, and does not result in a dissolution, but in a buy-out of the dissociating partner's interest in the partnership. See §35-10-616, MCA. The term "dissociation" is new to the act, and occurs upon the happening of any one of ten events specified in §35-10-616, MCA. Examples of events leading to dissociation include bankruptcy of a partner and death, see §35-10-616(6) (a) and (7) (a), MCA, but does not include a judicially ordered dissolution of the partnership.

The second track for the exiting partner does involve dissolution and winding up of the partnership's affairs. Section 35-10-624, MCA, sets forth the events causing dissolution and winding up of a partnership, and includes the following:

# Events causing dissolution and winding up of partnership business. . . . 

(5) a judicial decree, issued upon application by a partner, that:
(a) the economic purpose of the partnership is likely to be unreasonably frustrated;
(b) another partner has engaged in conduct relating to the partnership business that makes it not reasonably practicable to carry on the business in partnership with that partner; or (c) it is not otherwise reasonably practicable to carry on the partnership business in conformity with the partnership agreement. . . .

In this case, the District Court dissolved the Partnership pursuant to § 35-10-624(5), MCA. In so doing, it recognized that, in the absence of a partnership agreement to the contrary, the only possible result under RUPA was for the partnership assets to be liquidated and the proceeds distributed between the partners proportionately. The court reasoned, however, that the term "liquidate" had a variety of possible meanings, one of which was "to assemble and mobilize the assets, settle with the creditors and debtors and apportion the remaining assets, if any, among the stockholders or owners." Applying this definition, which the court had obtained from Black's Law Dictionary, the court concluded that a judicially ordered buy-out of Joan's interest in the Partnership by Clark was an acceptable alternative to liquidation of the partnership assets through a compelled sale. . . .

It is true that this Court has previously utilized dictionaries when seeking to define the common use and meaning of terms. However, in this case, we conclude that it was not necessary for the District Court to resort to such devices. Section 35-10-629(1), MCA, clearly provides that "[i]n winding up a partnership's business, the assets of the partnership must be applied to discharge its obligations to creditors, including partners who are creditors. Any surplus must be applied to pay in cash the net amount distributable to partners in accordance with their right to distributions pursuant to subsection (2)." (Emphasis added.) Furthermore, subsection (2) of the statute provides:

Each partner is entitled to a settlement of all partnership accounts upon winding up the partnership business. In settling accounts among the partners, the profits and losses that result from the liquidation of the partnership assets must be credited and charged to the partners' accounts. The partnership shall make a distribution to a partner in an amount equal to that partner's positive account balance. (Emphasis added.)

Thus, the common purpose and plain meaning of the term "liquidation," as it is used in §35-10-629(2),MCA, is to reduce the partnership assets to cash, pay creditors, and distribute to partners the value of their respective interest. See also 59A Am. Jur. 2d Partnership §1100 (2003). This is all part of the process of "winding up" the business of a partnership and terminating its affairs.

Clark invites this Court to take a liberal reading of §35-10-629, MCA, and cites Creel v. Lilly (1999), 354 Md. 77, 729 A.2d 385, in support of the proposition that judicially acceptable alternatives exist to compelled liquidation in a dissolution situation. At issue in Creel was whether the surviving partners of a partnership had a duty to liquidate all partnership assets because there was no provision in the partnership agreement providing for the continuation of the partnership upon a partner's death, and the estate had not consented to the continuation of business. Creel, 729 A. 2 d at 387 . After examining cases in which other courts had elected to order an in-kind distribution rather than a compelled liquidation, or had allowed the remaining partners to purchase the withdrawing partner's interest in the partnership, the court concluded that the UPA did not mandate a forced sale of all partnership assets in order to ascertain the true value of the business, and that "winding up" was not always synonymous with liquidation. Creel, 729 A. 2 d at 403. The court further noted that it would have reached the same conclusion regardless of whether the UPA or RUPA governed since, under RUPA, the remaining partners could have elected to continue business following the death of one of the partners. Creel, 729 A. 2 d at 397.

However, of critical distinction between the facts in Creel and the case subjudice is the manner in which the partners exited the entity. In Creel one of the partners had died. Here, Joan sought a court-ordered dissolution of the Partnership. Under RUPA, the death of a partner triggers the provisions of §35-10-619, MCA, which allows for the purchase of the dissociated partner's interest in the partnership, much like what was ordered in Creel. Conversely, a court-ordered dissolution pursuant to §35-10 624(5), MCA, as in this case, results in the dissolution and winding up of the partnership. Thus, Creel is both legally and factually distinguishable.

Furthermore, the cases relied upon by the court in Creel in reaching its conclusion that liquidation of assets was not always mandated upon dissolution, Nicholes v. Hunt (1975), 273 Or. 255, 541 P.2d 820, Logoluso v. Logoluso (1965), 233 Cal. App.2d 523, 43 Cal. Rptr. 678, Gregg v. Bernards (1968), 250 Or. 458, 443 P.2d 166, Goergen v. Nebrich (1958), 12 Misc. 2d 1011, 174 N.Y.S.2d 366, and Fortugno v. Hudson Manure Co. (1958), 51 N.J. Super. 482, 144 A.2d 207, are likewise pre-RUPA holdings, which are inapposite to the facts at issue in this case.

Accordingly, we conclude that when a partnership's dissolution is court ordered pursuant to §35-10-624(5), MCA, the partnership assets necessarily must be reduced to cash in order to satisfy the obligations of the partnership and distribute any net surplus in cash to the remaining partners in accordance with their respective interests. By adopting a judicially created alternative to this statutorily mandated requirement, the District Court erred.

Did the District Court err by failing to grant Joan's petition for an accounting of the Partnership's business affairs?

Joan maintains that the accounting performed by special master Blakely was inadequate. . . .

Every partner is generally entitled to have an accounting of the partnership's affairs, even in the absence of an express contract so providing. Moreover, RUPA provides that a partner may maintain an action against the partnership or another partner for legal or equitable relief, including an accounting as to partnership business, or to enforce a right to compel a dissolution and winding up of the partnership business under §35-10-624, MCA. . . .
The purpose of an accounting is to determine the rights and liabilities of the partners, and to ascertain the value of the partners' interests in the partnership as of a particular date, such as the date of dissolution. "When an action for an accounting is being used to wind up the partnership's affairs, the court is obligated to provide 'for a full accounting of the partnership assets and obligations and distribution of any remaining assets or liabilities to the partners in accordance with their interests in the partnership.'" Guntle v. Barnett (1994), 73 Wash. App. 825, 871 P.2d 627, 630. This is often accomplished through the appointment of a special master subject to court review, who conducts a comprehensive investigation of the transactions of the partnership and the partners. Guntle, 871 P.2d at 630. In rendering the accounting, mere summaries or lump listings of types of items, or schedules of cash to be distributed without detailing the firm's transactions, are generally insufficient, as are mere tax returns.

In this case, special master Blakely was charged with determining the amount of Joan's excess capital contributions and resolving disputes concerning ownership of Partnership assets. In this regard, Blakely performed a detailed accounting of the assets, liabilities, and capital contributions of each of the partners. While he accomplished much of this by reviewing the partnership tax returns from 1985 to 2001, some of which were apparently in draft form, Blakely also held several extensive meetings with the parties in which he heard oral arguments and received evidence. From these meetings, and information obtained from the partnership tax returns, Blakely prepared and submitted two reports to the District Court, detailing the partners' respective capital contributions and withdrawals, as well as partnership assets and liabilities. These reports further itemized transactions occurring within the Partnership from 1995 through 2001, and included a break-down for Blakely's determination of the suggested purchase price for Joan's interest in the Partnership. This was sufficient given the issues which were presented for Blakely's review, and given the fact that he testified before the District Court and was subject to cross-examination concerning his findings.

Because we conclude, however, that the Partnership's assets must be liquidated in order to satisfy the Partnership's obligations to its creditors and distribute the net surplus of any assets in cash to the partners, on remand it will become necessary for the District Court to perform a full accounting of the Partnership's affairs. Once again, this requires a detailed accounting of all the Partnership's assets and liabilities, as well as distributions of assets and liabilities to the partners in accordance with their respective interests in the Partnership. Blakely's reports may very well be of assistance in this process. . . .

# NOTES AND QUESTIONS 

1. Although a majority of courts have interpreted UPA (1914) § 38 as giving a non-wrongfully dissociating partner the right to force a liquidating sale of the partnership's assets, a number of courts have found exceptions to that rule. One such case is Nicholes v. Hunt, 541 P.2d 820 (Or. 1975). Hunt operated a business as a sole proprietorship. In order to obtain needed additional capital and services.
Hunt contributed the business to a new partnership in which he and Nicholes were equal partners. The new venture was a financial success but subject to considerable dissension. One year after formation, Hunt notified Nicholes that he was dissolving the partnership and that he intended to continue the partnership's business as sole proprietor. Nicholes sought judicial relief to protect his rights under UPA § 38(1) so that he might bid against Hunt for control of the partnership's assets. The trial court found the dissolution non-wrongful but refused to order a public sale. Instead, it apportioned and distributed the assets in kind, giving the partnership's operating assets to Hunt and giving to Nicholes the value of his partnership interest in cash.

Nicholes appealed, arguing that under UPA § 38(1) the assets must be sold at public sale unless all parties consent to some other method of liquidation. The Oregon Supreme Court affirmed the trial court's decision:

We conclude, as defendant contends and as the trial court found, that the equities lie with the defendant in this case. Further, since there was no evidence regarding the value which the partnership assets might command on the market, it is difficult for us to determine whether a sale would be beneficial or prejudicial to the respective parties. As earlier described, this is a unique, or unusual, business which required particular knowledge of the remanufacturing process and ability to repair and operate the necessary machinery. Plaintiff argues that he is entitled to purchase the 50 percent share of the defendant but this is no answer to the problem that confronted the trial court. The defendant conceived and designed the machinery and the method of operation, which was successfully operated for a number of years before formation of the partnership at will. Plaintiff is not precluded from engaging in a like or similar business.

541 P.2d at 828 .
2. A modern case also rejecting a strict interpretation of UPA (1914) §38 is Disotell v. Stiltner, 100 P.3d 890 (Alaska 2004).

Disotell argues that the superior court failed to follow the Act when the court gave Stiltner the option to purchase Disotell's partnership interest for $73,213.50, the value of Disotell's interest as calculated by the court. . . .

We decline to follow the line of cases holding that the statute requires liquidation. We hold that the superior court did not err in reading subsection .330(a) to allow it to permit Stiltner to buy out Disotell's partnership interest. Careful reading of the text of AS 32.05.330(a) does not convince us that this subsection absolutely compels liquidation and forbids a buyout. Under appropriate, although perhaps limited, circumstances, a buyout seems a justifiable way of winding up a partnership. The superior court reasoned that a buyout would reduce economic waste by avoiding the cost of appointing a receiver and conducting a sale. Even though there was no ongoing business, the superior court noted that the expense of a sale could total as much as twelve percent of the property's value. This was a valid reason and potentially benefitted both partners. The potential savings were significant. The court's effort to avoid further loss to both partners justifies its decision to offer Stiltner the buyout option. Further, properly conducted, a buyout guaranteed Disotell a fair value for his partnership interest. Liquidation exposed Disotell to the risk that no buyer would offer to pay fair market value for the property. A liquidation sale in which no other buyers participated might have given Stiltner an opportunity to buy the property for less than fair market value, to Disotell's disadvantage. . . .

Although it was not error to grant Stiltner the option to buy out Disotell's partnership interest, it was error to permit the buyout without requiring some objective determination of the value of all of the partnership assets, particularly the land and building Stiltner contributed. The superior court used tax appraisals to establish the value of the hotel property and parking lot. The court relied on a report by an expert witness who, to explain the accounting methodology set out in AS 32.05.350, "assume[d], for illustrative purposes only," that the hotel property and parking lot would sell for their tax-appraised values. The tax appraisals were not introduced into evidence. The expert discussed them only hypothetically to illustrate an entirely different point, not as support for an opinion of property values. Neither party introduced evidence of any appraisal. Disotell and Stiltner both acknowledge that neither offered any evidence of value of the partnership assets.

Because a buyout is appropriate only if it is for fair market value, and there was no admissible evidence of fair market value, we must remand. It will be necessary on remand to determine the value of the assets before Stiltner attempts to buy out Disotell. The parties may offer any evidence relevant to the value of the partnership property. The partnership assets include both the hotel property and the parking lot.

Contemporaneous appraisals of both will be necessary so that neither party is prejudiced by a fluctuation in the value of one asset. On appeal, Disotell claims that he had no pretrial notice that the superior court would establish a value for the partnership property. The remand will provide Disotell full opportunity to introduce evidence or otherwise address the issue.

Id. at 892-893. Is the court's reasoning persuasive?

# PROBLEM 2-7 

Alpha, Beta, Charlie, and Delta formed an oral, at-will partnership in Nirvana several years ago. Nirvana adopted the UPA (1914) in 1937 and the UPA (1997) in 1999. It is unclear which version of the UPA governs the ABCD partnership. In each of the following circumstances, determine whether the dissociated partner(s) or her successors in interest have a right to demand a wind-up and liquidating sale of the business. If not, then determine how the value of the dissociated partner's interest will be determined, whether payment must be made in cash, and whether payment may be made in installments over some period of time. If your answer is dependent in some circumstances on a determination of which version of the UPA governs, explain how your answer would change.

Circumstance \#1. At the partnership's monthly luncheon meeting, Alpha announces that he is withdrawing from the partnership effective immediately, and that he will insist that the partnership be liquidated.

Circumstance \#2. Alpha dies; Helen is Alpha's sole heir and the executor of Alpha's estate. Several weeks after Alpha's death, Beta, Charlie, Delta, and Helen meet to discuss what to do in the wake of Alpha's death. Beta, Charlie, and Delta indicate their desire to continue the business and to pay Alpha's estate the value of Alpha's interest over the next few years out of future profits. Helen consents to this plan.

Circumstance \#3. Alpha dies; Helen is Alpha's sole heir and the executor of Alpha's estate. Several weeks after Alpha's death, Beta, Charlie, Delta, and Helen meet to discuss what to do in the wake of Alpha's death. Beta, Charlie, and Delta indicate their desire to continue the business and to pay Alpha's estate the value of Alpha's interest over the next few years out of future profits. Helen refuses to consent to the continuance of the business. She demands that the business be liquidated and the value of Alpha's interest paid to Alpha's estate in cash.

Circumstance \#4. Alpha dies. Four weeks later Beta notifies Charlie and Delta that she is withdrawing from the partnership effective immediately.
# PROBLEM 2-8 

Lucas has owned and operated Lucas Motors, a car dealership, as a sole proprietorship for 30 years. Short on funds for a planned renovation and expansion of the dealership facilities, Lucas turned to Sam, who recently inherited a great deal of money. Subsequently, Sam and Lucas formed an oral, at-will partnership to which Lucas contributed their car dealership and Sam contributed $10 million. The partners agreed that Lucas would receive 75 percent of the profits and Sam 25 percent. The partners' shared expectation was that Sam would be an active participant in the business. However, several weeks into the relationship, Lucas and Sam had a serious falling-out over the extent of Sam's authority. Several days later, Sam delivered a written notice to Lucas, expressing his will to withdraw from the partnership. In the letter, Sam demanded that the dealership be liquidated and that the cash remaining after payment of creditors be distributed to the partners.

Lucas has consulted your firm for advice. Lucas believes that Sam is entitled to no more than the return of the $10 million that he invested in the partnership, most of which is still in the partnership's account at a local bank. What is your advice assuming that UPA (1997) governs? Would your advice be different if UPA (1914) applies?
