
One difficult tactical issue is whether to react to a deponent's testimony. The important consideration is whether you likely will derive any benefit from the reaction. That depends upon the circumstances. In some cases, you will not want to react in any way to a witness's testimony; for example, you would not want to send a message that the testimony has hurt your side of the case. In other circumstances, you will want to react, to encourage or to discourage further testimony of the type you are hearing. Reasonable lawyers may differ over appropriate approaches, and each witness has to be taken one by one.

If the witness is utterly hostile, the best approach is probably a nonreactive one. You are unlikely to effect a positive change in the witness's testimony through any reaction. You should push hard. You should probe sensitive areas to see if the witness reacts. But ask what you need to ask, and get out.

If a witness is friendly or neutral, react normally, as you would in conversation with someone. A smile, an approving nod, or a warm tone of voice will put the witness at ease and will encourage the witness to continue in the same vein in which the witness has been testifying. A frown, a wrinkled brow, or a puzzled tone will cause a friendly witness to pause to consider whether the testimony is confusing, incomplete, or contradictory.

A simple pause, and silence, also may affect a deponent, friendly or not. There are some witnesses who cannot bear quiet. They will finish an answer. But if you pause, and look at them as if you expect more, they will keep talking! If you want them talking, try it. This works especially well if you have developed a rhythm with the witness. If the witness answers a question and you do not ask another question immediately, the witness may resume talking.

Suppose a witness is relatively neutral, or is unfriendly but semicontrollable. Then, rather than remain stoic in the face of unfavorable testimony, you might choose to react. One approach is to use a friendly conversational style until the witness gives the first unfavorable response, at which point you may alter your style to express confusion or disapproval. If the witness retreats, then shift back to the more friendly, conversational style. The witness gets the message over time that hostile testimony provokes negative reaction. Such an inference will not and should not cause the witness to refrain from telling the truth, but it does encourage the witness not to stretch for negative spins in the witness's answers to your questions just to please the other side. Your typical lay witness (setting aside experts for the moment) does not like to be attacked.
