
$$
\begin{aligned}
& \text { UPA (1914) §§ 31(1)(d), 38(1) } \\
& \text { UPA (1997) §§ 601(3), 701, 801(1) }
\end{aligned}
$$

Partnerships are often bound together by shared values and expectations as to effort, collegiality, and professionalism. If a partner does not measure up to the shared values and expectations, the other partners may wish to expel the deficient partner. In a term partnership, if the majority ousts the deficient partner, this dissociation could be deemed "wrongful," exposing the ousting partners to substantial liability. Accordingly, partners will often negotiate in advance for terms governing expulsion. To the extent the partners do not so agree, the right to expel will be governed by the dictates of partnership law, including fiduciary duty.
# Bohatch v. Butler \& Binion <br> Supreme Court of Texas, 1998 <br> 977 S.W.2d 543 

ENOCH, Justice.

## I. FACTS

[Colette] Bohatch became an associate in the Washington, D.C., office of Butler \& Binion in 1986 after working for several years as Deputy Assistant General Counsel at the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. John McDonald, the managing partner of the office, and Richard Powers, a partner, were the only other attorneys in the Washington office. The office did work for Pennzoil almost exclusively.

Bohatch was made partner in February 1990. She then began receiving internal firm reports showing the number of hours each attorney worked, billed, and collected. From her review of these reports, Bohatch became concerned that McDonald was overbilling Pennzoil and discussed the matter with Powers. Together they reviewed and copied portions of McDonald's time diary. Bohatch's review of McDonald's time entries increased her concern.

On July 15, 1990, Bohatch met with Louis Paine, the firm's managing partner, to report her concern that McDonald was overbilling Pennzoil. Paine said he would investigate. Later that day, Bohatch told Powers about her conversation with Paine.

The following day, McDonald met with Bohatch and informed her that Pennzoil was not satisfied with her work and wanted her work to be supervised. Bohatch testified that this was the first time she had ever heard criticism of her work for Pennzoil.

The next day, Bohatch repeated her concerns to Paine and to R. Hayden Burns and Marion E. McDaniel, two other members of the firm's management committee, in a telephone conversation. Over the next month, Paine and Burns investigated Bohatch's complaint. They reviewed the Pennzoil bills and supporting computer print-outs for those bills. They then discussed the allegations with Pennzoil in-house counsel John Chapman, the firm's primary contact with Pennzoil. Chapman, who had a long-standing relationship with McDonald, responded that Pennzoil was satisfied that the bills were reasonable.

In August, Paine met with Bohatch and told her that the firm's investigation revealed no basis for her contentions. He added that she should begin looking for other employment, but that the firm would continue to provide her a monthly draw, insurance coverage, office space, and a secretary. After this meeting, Bohatch received no further work assignments from the firm.

In January 1991, the firm denied Bohatch a year-end partnership distribution for 1990 and reduced her tentative distribution share for 1991 to zero. In June, the firm paid Bohatch her monthly draw and told her that this draw would be her last. Finally, in August, the firm gave Bohatch until November to vacate her office.

By September, Bohatch had found new employment. She filed this suit on October 18, 1991, and the firm voted formally to expel her from the partnership three days later, October 21, 1991. . . .
The breach of fiduciary duty claim and a breach of contract claim were tried to a jury. The jury found that the firm breached the partnership agreement and its fiduciary duty. It awarded Bohatch $57,000 for past lost wages, $250,000 for past mental anguish, $4,000,000 total in punitive damages (this amount was apportioned against several defendants), and attorney's fees. The trial court rendered judgment for Bohatch in the amounts found by the jury, except it disallowed attorney's fees because the judgment was based in tort. After suggesting remittitur, which Bohatch accepted, the trial court reduced the punitive damages to around $237,000.

All parties appealed. The court of appeals held that the firm's only duty to Bohatch was not to expel her in bad faith. 905 S.W.2d at 602. The court of appeals stated that "'[b]ad faith' in this context means only that partners cannot expel another partner for self-gain." Id. Finding no evidence that the firm expelled Bohatch for self-gain, the court concluded that Bohatch could not recover for breach of fiduciary duty. Id. at 604 . However, the court concluded that the firm breached the partnership agreement when it reduced Bohatch's tentative partnership distribution for 1991 to zero without notice, and when it terminated her draw three months before she left. Id. at 606. The court concluded that Bohatch was entitled to recover $35,000 in lost earnings for 1991 but none for 1990, and no mental anguish damages. Id. at 606-607. Accordingly, the court rendered judgment for Bohatch for $35,000 plus $225,000 in attorney's fees. Id. at 608.

# II. Breach of Fiduciary Duty 

We have long recognized as a matter of common law that " [t] he relationship between . . . partners . . . is fiduciary in character, and imposes upon all the participants the obligation of loyalty to the joint concern and of the utmost good faith, fairness, and honesty in their dealings with each other with respect to matters pertaining to the enterprise." Fitz-Gerald v. Hull, 150 Tex. 39, 237 S.W.2d 256, 264 (1951) (quotation omitted). Yet, partners have no obligation to remain partners; "at the heart of the partnership concept is the principle that partners may choose with whom they wish to be associated." Gelder Med. Group v. Webber, 41 N.Y.2d 680, 394 N.Y.S.2d 867, 870-871, 363 N.E.2d 573, 577 (1977). The issue presented, one of first impression, is whether the fiduciary relationship between and among partners creates an exception to the at-will nature of partnerships; that is, in this case, whether it gives rise to a duty not to expel a partner who reports suspected overbilling by another partner. . . .
[N]either statutory nor contract law principles answer the question of whether the firm owed Bohatch a duty not to expel her. The Texas Uniform Partnership Act, Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Ann. art. 6701b, addresses expulsion of a partner only in the context of dissolution of the partnership. See id. §§31,38. In this case, as provided by the partnership agreement, Bohatch's expulsion did not dissolve the partnership. . . . Finally, the partnership agreement contemplates expulsion of a partner and prescribes procedures to be followed, but it does not specify or limit the grounds for expulsion. Thus, while Bohatch's claim that she was expelled in an improper way is governed by the partnership agreement, her claim that she was expelled for an improper reason is not. Therefore, we look to the common law to find the principles governing Bohatch's claim that the firm breached a duty when it expelled her.
Courts in other states have held that a partnership may expel a partner for purely business reasons. See St. Joseph's Reg'l Health Ctr. v. Munos, 326 Ark. 605, 934 S.W.2d 192, 197 (1996) (holding that partner's termination of another partner's contract to manage services performed by medical partnership was not breach of fiduciary duty because termination was for business purpose); Waite v. Sylvester, 131 N.H. 663, 560 A.2d 619, 622-623 (1989) (holding that removal of a partner as managing partner of limited partnership was not breach of fiduciary duty because it was based on legitimate business purpose); Leigh v. Crescent Square, Ltd., 80 Ohio App. 3d 231, 608 N.E.2d 1166, 1170 (1992) ("Taking into account the general partners' past problems and the previous litigation wherein Leigh was found to have acted in contravention of the partnership's best interests, the ouster was instituted in good faith and for legitimate business purposes."). Further, courts recognize that a law firm can expel a partner to protect relationships both within the firm and with clients. See Lawlis v. Kightlinger \& Gray, 562 N.E.2d 435, 442 (Ind. App. 1990) (holding that law firm did not breach fiduciary duty by expelling partner after partner's successful struggle against alcoholism because "if a partner's propensity toward alcohol has the potential to damage his firm's good will or reputation for astuteness in the practice of law, simple prudence dictates the exercise of corrective action . . . since the survival of the partnership itself potentially is at stake"); Holman v. Coie, 11 Wash. App. 195, 522 P.2d 515, 523 (1974) (finding no breach of fiduciary duty where law firm expelled two partners because of their contentious behavior during executive committee meetings and because one, as state senator, made speech offensive to major client). Finally, many courts have held that a partnership can expel a partner without breaching any duty in order to resolve a "fundamental schism." See Waite, 560 A.2d at 623 (concluding that in removing a partner as managing partner "the partners acted in good faith to resolve the 'fundamental schism' between them"); Heller v. Pillsbury Madison \& Sutro, 50 Cal. App. 4th 1367, 58 Cal. Rptr. 2d 336, 348 (1996) (holding that law firm did not breach fiduciary duty when it expelled partner who was not as productive as firm expected and who was offensive to some of firm's major clients); Levy v. Nassau Queens Med. Group, 102 A.D.2d 845, 476 N.Y.S.2d 613, 614 (1984) (concluding that expelling partner because of "[p]olicy disagreements" is not "bad faith").

The fiduciary duty that partners owe one another does not encompass a duty to remain partners or else answer in tort damages. Nonetheless, Bohatch and several distinguished legal scholars urge this Court to recognize that public policy requires a limited duty to remain partners-i.e., a partnership must retain a whistleblower partner. They argue that such an extension of a partner's fiduciary duty is necessary because permitting a law firm to retaliate against a partner who in good faith reports suspected overbilling would discourage compliance with rules of professional conduct and thereby hurt clients.

While this argument is not without some force, we must reject it. A partnership exists solely because the partners choose to place personal confidence and trust in one another. See Holman, 522 P.2d at 524 ("The foundation of a professional relationship is personal confidence and trust."). Just as a partner can be expelled, without a breach of any common law duty, over disagreements about firm policy or to resolve some other "fundamental schism," a partner can be expelled for accusing another partner of overbilling without subjecting the partnership to tort damages. Such charges, whether true or not, may have a profound effect on the personal confidence and trust essential to the partner relationship. Once such charges are made, partners may find it impossible to continue to work together to their mutual benefit and the benefit of their clients.

We are sensitive to the concern expressed by the dissenting Justices that "retaliation against a partner who tries in good faith to correct or report perceived misconduct virtually assures that others will not take these appropriate steps in the future."-S.W.2d at- (Spector, J., dissenting). However, the dissenting Justices do not explain how the trust relationship necessary both for the firm's existence and for representing clients can survive such serious accusations by one partner against another. The threat of tort liability for expulsion would tend to force partners to remain in untenable circumstance-suspicious of and angry with each other-to their own detriment and that of their clients whose matters are neglected by lawyers distracted with intra-firm frictions. . . .

We emphasize that our refusal to create an exception to the at-will nature of partnerships in no way obviates the ethical duties of lawyers. Such duties sometimes necessitate difficult decisions, as when a lawyer suspects overbilling by a colleague. The fact that the ethical duty to report may create an irreparable schism between partners neither excuses failure to report nor transforms expulsion as a means of resolving that schism into a tort.

We hold that the firm did not owe Bohatch a duty not to expel her for reporting suspected overbilling by another partner.

# III. Breach of the Partnership Agreement 

The court of appeals concluded that the firm breached the partnership agreement by reducing Bohatch's tentative distribution for 1991 to zero without the requisite notice. 905 S.W.2d at 606. The firm contests this finding on the ground that the management committee had the right to set tentative and year-end bonuses. However, the partnership agreement guarantees a monthly draw of $7,500 per month regardless of the tentative distribution. Moreover, the firm's right to reduce the bonus was contingent upon providing proper notice to Bohatch. The firm does not dispute that it did not give Bohatch notice that the firm was reducing her tentative distribution. Accordingly, the court of appeals did not err in finding the firm liable for breach of the partnership agreement. Moreover, because Bohatch's damages sound in contract, and because she sought attorney's fees at trial under section 38.001 (8) of the Texas Civil Practice and Remedies Code, we affirm the court of appeals' award of Bohatch's attorney's fees. . . .

Spector, joined by Phillips, Chief Justice, dissenting.
[W]hat's the use you learning to do right when it's troublesome to do right and ain't no trouble to do wrong, and the wages is just the same?

- The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn The issue in this appeal is whether law partners violate a fiduciary duty by retaliating against one partner for questioning the billing practices of another partner.
I would hold that partners violate their fiduciary duty to one another by punishing compliance with the Disciplinary Rules of Professional Conduct. Accordingly, I dissent. . . .

# II. 

The majority views the partnership relationship among lawyers as strictly business. I disagree. The practice of law is a profession first, then a business. Moreover, it is a self-regulated profession subject to the Rules promulgated by this Court.

As attorneys, we take an oath to "honestly demean [ourselves] in the practice of law; and . . . discharge [our] duty to [our] client[s] to the best of [our] ability." Tex. Gov't Code §82.037. This oath of honesty and duty is not mere "self-adulatory bombast" but mandated by the Legislature. See Schware v. Board of Bar Exam'rs, 353 U.S. 232, 247, 77 S. Ct. 752, 760-761, 1 L. Ed. 2d 796 (Frankfurter, J. concurring) (noting that the rhetoric used to describe the esteemed role of the legal profession has real meaning). As attorneys, we bear responsibilities to our clients and the bar itself that transcend ordinary business relationships.

Certain requirements imposed by the Rules have particular relevance in this case. Lawyers may not charge unconscionable fees. Tex. Disciplinary R. Prof'l Conduct 1.04(a), reprinted in Tex. Gov't Code, tit. 2, subtit. G app. A (Tex. State Bar R. art. X, § 9); see D.C. R. Prof'l Conduct 1.5(a) (1) (West 1997). Partners and supervisory attorneys have a duty to take reasonable remedial action to avoid or mitigate the consequences of known violations by other lawyers in their firm. Tex. Disciplinary R. Prof'l Conduct 5.01; see D.C. R. Prof'l Conduct 5.1. Lawyers who know that another lawyer has violated a rule of professional conduct in a way that raises a substantial question as to that lawyer's honesty or fitness as a lawyer must report that violation. Tex. Disciplinary R. Prof'l Conduct 8.03(a); D.C. R. Prof'l Conduct 8.3. In Texas, Rules 5.01 and 8.03 are essential to the self-regulatory nature of the practice of law and the honor of our profession itself. . . .

## III.

The few cases that provide guidance here do so with conflicting results, but each case highlights the grave implications of those decisions for a self-regulated profession. Ultimately, agreements to practice law may not by their terms or effect circumvent the ethical obligations of attorneys established by law. See Southwestern Bell Tel. Co. v. DeLanney, 809 S.W.2d 493, 494 n. 1 (Tex. 1991); Central Educ. Agency v. George West Indep. Sch. Dist., 783 S.W.2d 200, 202 (Tex. 1989).

## A.

In Wieder v. Skala, the New York Court of Appeals held in an at-will employment context that an associate terminated for reporting another associate's misconduct had a valid claim for breach of contract against his law firm based on an implied-in-law obligation to comply with the rules of the profession. 80 N.Y.2d 628, 593 N.Y.S.2d 752, 757, 609 N.E.2d 105, 110 (1992). The court recognized that "[i]ntrinsic to [the hiring of an attorney to practice law] . . . was the unstated but essential compact that in conducting the firm's legal practice both plaintiff and the firm would do so in compliance with the prevailing rules of conduct and ethical standards of the profession." Id. 593 N.Y.S.2d at 756-757, 609 N.E.2d at 109-110. To find otherwise would amount to "nothing less than a frustration of the only legitimate purpose of the employment relationship," id. 593 N.Y.S.2d at 757, 609 N.E.2d at 110, that is, "the lawful and ethical practice of law." Id. 593 N.Y.S.2d at 755, 609 N.E.2d at 108. See also Seymour Moskow-itz, Employment-at-Will and Codes of Ethics: The Professional's Dilemma, 23 Val. U. L. Rev. 33, 56-66 (1988) (arguing for a public policy exception to at-will employment for professional codes of ethics). The plaintiff was not just an employee, but also an "independent officer of the court responsible in a broader public sense for [his] professional obligations." Wieder, 593 N.Y.S.2d at 755, 609 N.E.2d at 108. . . .

# B. 

I believe that the fiduciary relationship among law partners should incorporate the rules of the profession promulgated by this Court. See Central Educ. Agency, 783 S.W.2d at 202 (noting that employment contracts incorporate existing law). Although the evidence put on by Bohatch is by no means conclusive, applying the proper presumptions of a no-evidence review, this trial testimony amounts to some evidence that Bohatch made a good-faith report of suspected overbilling in an effort to comply with her professional duty. Further, it provides some evidence that the partners of Butler \& Binion began a retaliatory course of action before any investigation of the allegation had begun.

In light of this Court's role in setting standards to govern attorneys' conduct, it is particularly inappropriate for the Court to deny recourse to attorneys wronged for adhering to the Disciplinary Rules. See Blackwell, supra, at 44-48. I would hold that in this case the law partners violated their fiduciary duty by retaliating against a fellow partner who made a good-faith effort to alert her partners to the possible overbilling of a client.

## c.

The duty to prevent overbilling and other misconduct exists for the protection of the client. Even if a report turns out to be mistaken or a client ultimately consents to the behavior in question, as in this case, retaliation against a partner who tries in good faith to correct or report perceived misconduct virtually assures that others will not take these appropriate steps in the future. Although I agree with the majority that partners have a right not to continue a partnership with someone against their will, they may still be liable for damages directly resulting from terminating that relationship. See Woodruff v. Bryant, 558 S.W.2d 535, 539 (Tex. Civ. App.-Corpus Christi 1977, writ ref'd n.r.e.).
# III. 

The Court's writing in this case sends an inappropriate signal to lawyers and to the public that the rules of professional responsibility are subordinate to a law firm's other interests. Under the majority opinion's vision for the legal profession, the wages would not even be the same for "doing right"; they diminish considerably and leave an attorney who acts ethically and in good faith without recourse. Accordingly, I respectfully dissent.

## PROBLEM 2-11

Baker and Smith is a partnership engaged in the practice of law. In 2011, Frank Wesson, then 60 years old, was admitted to the partnership, following a one-year trial period in which he was employed as a litigator. Previously, Wesson had enjoyed a career as a high-profile attorney. The Baker and Smith partnership agreement, to which Wesson assented, provided that "any partner may be expelled without notice or cause by a vote of a majority of the partners."

Wesson's association turned out to be unsatisfactory to his partners. He accepted several high-profile cases on a pro bono basis, including advocacy on behalf of a controversial gun rights organization. This caused a negative reaction from several important clients. Additionally, some partners viewed Wesson as abrasive, both professionally and personally. In December 2020, the partners voted unanimously to expel Wesson from the partnership, effective December 31, 2020.

What are Wesson's rights under UPA (1997)?
