
, The systematic study of intellectual property regimes naturally begins with the requirements for or elements of protectability. This section investigates the five requirements of patentability. In prior editions, we began our coverage with patentable subject matter ( ยง101 ), which states simply and broadly that Whoever invents or discovers any new and useful process, machine, manufacture, or composition of matter, or any new and useful improvement thereof, may obtain a patent therefor, subject to the conditions and requirements of this title.
Until 2008, with some exceptions (notably the brief period between 1978 and 1981), courts interpreted this language relatively expansively. And by the early 2000s, the Federal Circuit had pretty much lowered the patentable subject matter hurdle to a chalk line on the track. Even non-technological business methods qualified for patentability under State St. Bank v. Signature Fin. Grp., 149 F.3d 1368, 1375 (Fed. Cir. 1998).

Thus, much of the challenge in understanding patentability related to novelty ( ยง102 ), nonobviousness ( ยง103 ), and, to a lesser extent, disclosure ( ยง112 ). The Supreme Court's decisions in Mayo Collaborative Servs. v. Prometheus Labs., Inc., 566 U.S. 66 (2012) and subsequent cases, however, significantly raised and complicated the patent eligibility standard, particularly as it relates to business methods, software, genetics, and medical diagnostic methods. This shift has intertwined the patent eligibility inquiry with the nonobviousness and disclosure inquiries. To comprehend nonobviousness, it is necessary to understand novelty. Therefore, we cover patentability in the following order: (1) novelty; (2) nonobviousness; (3) utility; (4) disclosure; and (5) subject matter. Please bear in mind, however, that courts have indicated that patentable subject matter is a threshold inquiry, and that it is generally decided before issues of novelty or nonobviousness are raised and without directly considering them.
