
## MBCA §§ 8.01, 8.31, 8.41, 8.42

This chapter focuses on the fiduciary duties of corporate officers and directors. In corporation law, fiduciary duty has two quite different foci. Much as described in Chapters 1 and 2 with respect to partners and ordinary agents, the fiduciary duty of loyalty operates to constrain directors and officers in their pursuit of self-interest. Thus, it is an actionable wrong for an officer or director to compete with her corporation or divert to personal use assets or opportunities belonging to her corporation. In this first aspect, fiduciary duty applies in a similar fashion to the officers and directors of both closely held and publicly traded corporations.

The long-standing second focus of corporate law fiduciary duty is directors' official conduct in directing and managing the business and affairs of the corporation. Both statutory and judge-made law assign to the directors the power, authority, and responsibility to manage the business and affairs of the corporation. In this context, fiduciary duty ^1 broadens to include not only a duty of loyalty but also a duty of care. In this second aspect, much of the case law involves publicly traded firms-and understanding fiduciary duty as it relates to the publicly traded corporation is the principal focus of this chapter. ^2

2. In Chapters 8 and 9 we will examine how lawmakers and planners deal with the governance problems in closely held corporations and LLCs and the role fiduciary duty plays in that setting.
An essential element of the directors' authority and power is the business judgment rule - a judicial presumption that the directors have acted in accordance with their fiduciary duties of care, loyalty, and good faith. The protection provided by the business judgment rule lies in the much greater pleading and evidentiary burden that it places on plaintiffs seeking to hold directors liable for allegedly breaching their fiduciary duties while engaged in official conduct on behalf of the corporation. This greater pleading and evidentiary burden deters frivolous lawsuits. For example, any lawsuit seeking to hold directors liable for business decisions that have gone awry will be dismissed on the pleadings unless the complaining plaintiff can plead facts that, if proved, would rebut the presumptions underlying the business judgment rule. Merely alleging that a decision has turned out badly, even very badly, does not state a cause of action. In other words, with regard to directors' actions taken as managers, such as major business decisions or determining the corporation's long-term goals and strategies, judges interpret fiduciary duty and use the business judgment rule to provide directors with broad discretion to manage the corporation's business.

The following discussion of the business judgment rule is instructive, and you will benefit from revisiting it from time to time as you proceed through this chapter:

The appellees-directors herein claim that they are protected by the presumption of good faith and fair dealing that arises from the business judgment rule and, therefore, they do not have the burden of proving that their decision to purchase CSC was intrinsically fair to the Browns' minority shareholders.

The issue before us, then, centers on the applicability of the business judgment rule. The business judgment rule is a principle of corporate governance that has been part of the common law for at least one hundred fifty years. It has traditionally operated as a shield to protect directors from liability for their decisions. If the directors are entitled to the protection of the rule, then the courts should not interfere with or second-guess their decisions. If the directors are not entitled to the protection of the rule, then the courts scrutinize the decision as to its intrinsic fairness to the corporation and the corporation's minority shareholders. The rule is a rebuttable presumption that directors are better equipped than the courts to make business judgments and that the directors acted without self-dealing or personal interest and exercised reasonable diligence and acted with good faith. A party challenging a board of directors' decision bears the burden of rebutting the presumption that the decision was a proper exercise of the business judgment of the board.

The parties have agreed that Delaware law is applicable to this dispute and they both focus on the recent case of Aronson v. Lewis (Del. 1984), 473 A.2d 805. In Aronson, the Delaware Supreme Court set forth the rule at 812 :
... The business judgment rule is an acknowledgement of the managerial prerogatives of Delaware directors under Section 141 (a). It is a presumption that in making a business decision the directors of a corporation acted on an informed basis, in good faith and in the honest belief that the action taken was in the best interests of the company. Absent an abuse of discretion, that judgment will be respected by the courts. The burden is on the party challenging the decision to establish facts rebutting the presumption.

Gries Sports Enters., Inc. v. Cleveland Browns Football Co., 496 N.E.2d 959, 963-964 (Ohio 1986).

The cases in this chapter will constantly challenge you to deepen and refine your understanding of the business judgment rule. Keep in mind these policy questions. To what extent should officers or directors have discretion to take a long-term rather than short-term approach to corporate profitability, to take into account the interests of other constituencies or the larger community, or to chart a course that other, similar corporations have eschewed? To what extent may officers or directors act quickly and decisively to seize a business opportunity that might be lost without aggressive and entrepreneurial decision making? How does the business judgment rule reflect society's answer to these policy questions?


[^0]: 1. Note that the Model Business Corporation Act (MBCA) uses the term "standards of conduct," rather than "fiduciary duty." This omission was intended to avoid any confusion between the rules governing a director's official conduct and rules governing fiduciaries under the law of trusts (see Official Comment, MBCA §8.30 ). Nonetheless, the standards of conduct set forth by §8.30 do no more than restate long-standing judicial doctrine concerning fiduciary duty. As a result, courts in every state continue to identify the standards governing a director's official conduct as "fiduciary duties."