
Reasonable lawyers may take a variety of approaches to the tactical question of whether and when to challenge a witness through overt, aggressive cross-examination or impeachment. Some would argue that it is better not to engage in extensive cross-examination or impeachment because doing so tips the questioner's hand for trial. As long as you know all of the bad things the witness will say, save your best attacks for surprise when the witness is live on the stand in front of the judge or jury.

Other lawyers would argue that waiting until trial often is a mistake. The vast majority of civil cases never go to trial. The case is won or lost at the summary judgment stage. If there is no dismissal at that time, the case likely settles. So, if you have good cross-examination or impeachment material, you may want to use it at the deposition. Depositions are the places where the case actually gets won, lost, or positioned for settlement.
We think the correct answer to the tactical question is: it depends. First, the standard for getting summary judgment is that there are no genuine issues of material fact, and a party is entitled to win the case as a matter of law. ^20 So, if your cross-examination or impeachment of a deponent will definitively remove or establish a material fact, go for it!

Suppose instead that the cross-examination or the impeachment will have a lesser effect. Then the tactical question is trickier. The questioning lawyer has to balance the potential desirability of surprising the witness on the stand later at trial against the desirability of testing the witness a bit at the deposition. In that balance, the authors distinguish between impeachment and cross-examination. Cross-examination can lead to the discovery of additional information. In that regard, the questioning fits the purposes of a deposition even when the questioning does not definitively remove or establish a material fact. On the other hand, impeachment is not likely to get you new facts. It just impacts the credibility of the witness. Seldom is the impeachment so devastating that it helps much at summary judgment, when credibility determinations are inappropriate. So, except when impeachment of the particular party or witness is likely to encourage settlement, we recommend that you save true impeachment material for later use.
