
Courts have long recognized that trade secret protection can "implicate the interest in freedom of expression or advance another significant public interest," RESTATEMENT (THIRD) OF UNFAIR COMPETITION, §40, comment c, and recognized a limited privilege to disclose trade secrets. See David W. Quinto \& Stuart H. Singer, 1 Trade SECRETS: LAW AND PRACTICE §3.02; 1 MELVIN JAGER, TRADE SECRETS LAW §3:14.

The Restatement provides that the exception depends upon the circumstances of the particular case, including the nature of the information, the purpose of the disclosure, and the means by which the actor acquired the information. A privilege is likely to be recognized, for example, in connection with the disclosure of information that is relevant to public health or safety, or to the commission of a crime or tort, or to other matters of substantial public concern.
§40, comment c .
This framing of a public policy exception, however, offers relatively little clarity or solace to those who seek to report corporate wrongdoing. See Peter S. Menell, Tailoring a Public Policy Exception to Trade Secret Protection, 105 CAL. L. REV. 1, 31-36 (2017). Nearly all businesses require their employees to sign NDAs as a condition of employment. Such agreements are essential to being able to establish the reasonable precautions necessary to secure trade secret protection. They are also broad and strict. What if an employee uncovers evidence of regulatory violations, fraud, or even criminal violations at their company? Do they violate their NDA by consulting an attorney or disclosing documents revealing the illegal activity to the government?

At first blush, RESTATEMENT (THIRD) OF UNFAIR COMPETITION, §40, comment c, appears to provide some leeway to report the illegal activity. The murky contours of the public policy limitation, however, would give a potential whistleblower pause. How can the employee evaluate "the circumstances of the particular case, including the nature of the information, the purpose of the disclosure, and the means by which the actor acquired the information" without consulting an attorney? At a minimum, its characterization as a defense that turns on a case-by-case balancing of potentially subjective factors means that an employee or contractor who divulges proprietary information to the government could be sued for their breach of an NDA. The prospective whistleblower would likely have to consult an attorney, with the attendant costs, and the very act of discussing the allegedly illegal activity with the lawyer could create exposure for violating the NDA. More generally, many prospective whistleblowers might not even be aware of the public policy exception to their NDA.

Cafasso v. Gen. Dynamics C4 Sys., 637 F.3d 1047 (9th Cir. 2011), illustrates the Catch-22 that existed for whistleblowers prior to enactment of the DTSA. While working as a Chief Scientist at a government aerospace contractor, Mary Cafasso became aware of corporate decisions that she believed to be in violation of the company's obligations under its government contracts. Her reporting of these concerns internally went unheeded. Upon learning that her position was being eliminated, she hurriedly downloaded numerous confidential files that she believed could support her suspicion. She subsequently filed a False Claims Act action against her former employer. Her employer learned of Cafasso's removal of proprietary documents and filed suit against her in state court for breach of contract, misappropriation of trade secrets, and conversion. Notwithstanding that Cafasso never disclosed the confidential files to anyone other than her counsel and the government under seal, the court ultimately determined that Cafasso was not immunized by a public policy limitation and ordered her to pay $300,000 in attorneys' fees for the breach of contract action.

On appeal, the Ninth Circuit declined to adopt a public policy exception in a case involving "vast and indiscriminate appropriation" of confidential files, even for the purpose of reporting allegedly illegal activity to her attorney and the government. The court emphasized the overbreadth of the document retrieval, notwithstanding that Cafasso was under substantial time pressure in gathering the documents. The court expressed concern about the sensitivity of the information, despite the facts that it was all information to which Cafasso was authorized to view and that she limited disclosure to her attorney (who was also duty-bound to protect the information) and the government through a sealed court filing.

Given the exigency surrounding whistleblower situations, how many employees are willing to run the risk and exposure of a trade secret suit? Whistleblowers jeopardize their career, financial security, emotional stability, health insurance, and social community. Many struggle to find other positions in their field. See Menell, 105 CAL. L. REV. at 36-44. As the authors of an empirical study examining corporate fraud at large U.S. companies note, " [t] he surprising part [of whistleblowing] is not that most employees do not talk; it is that some talk at all." Alexander Dyck, Adair Morse \& Luigi Zingales, Who Blows the Whistle on Corporate Fraud?, 65 J. FIN. 2213, 2245 (2010).

Congress addressed these concerns as part of the DTSA. Section 7 expressly immunizes whistleblowers from trade secret liability so long as they limit disclosure to trusted intermediaries (attorneys and the government through confidential channels). The legislative history explains that the provision aims to counteract the concern that corporations can "bully" and deter potential whistleblowers through the mere threat of costly trade secret litigation. See 162 CONG. REC. S1636 (2016). Furthermore, Congress included a requirement that trade secret owners provide notice of this immunity in nondisclosure agreements with employees and contractors.
(b) Immunity from Liability for Confidential Disclosure of a Trade Secret to the Government or in a Court Filing (1) IMMUNITY.-An individual shall not be held criminally or civilly liable under any Federal or State trade secret law for the disclosure of a trade secret that- (A) is made- (i) in confidence to a Federal, State, or local government official, either directly or indirectly, or to an attorney; and (ii) solely for the purpose of reporting or investigating a suspected violation of law; or (B) is made in a complaint or other document filed in a lawsuit or other proceeding, if such filing is made under seal.
(2) Use of Trade Secret Information in Anti-Retaliation LAWSUIT.-An individual who files a lawsuit for retaliation by an employer for reporting a suspected violation of law may disclose the trade secret to the attorney of the individual and use the trade secret information in the court proceeding, if the individual- (A) files any document containing the trade secret under seal; and (B) does not disclose the trade secret, except pursuant to court order.
(3) Notice.- (A) In GENERAL.-An employer shall provide notice of the immunity set forth in this subsection in any contract or agreement with an employee that governs the use of a trade secret or other confidential information.
(B) Policy Document.-An employer shall be considered to be in compliance with the notice requirement in subparagraph (A) if the employer provides a cross-reference to a policy document provided to the employee that sets forth the employer's reporting policy for a suspected violation of law.
(C) NON-COMPLIANCE.-If an employer does not comply with the notice requirement in subparagraph (A), the employer may not be awarded exemplary damages or attorney fees under subparagraph (C) or (D) of section 1836(b)(3) in an action against an employee to whom notice was not provided.
(D) ApPLICABILITY.—This paragraph shall apply to contracts and agreements that are entered into or updated after the date of enactment of this subsection.
(4) Employee Defined.-For purposes of this subsection, the term 'employee' includes any individual performing work as a contractor or consultant for an employer.
(5) Rule of Construction.-Except as expressly provided for under this subsection, nothing in this subsection shall be construed to authorize, or limit liability for, an act that is otherwise prohibited by law, such as the unlawful access of material by unauthorized means.
DTSA §7, codified at 18 U.S.C. §1833.
# COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS 

1. Could someone who wishes to steal a trade secret abuse this protection? How?
2. The DTSA immunity provision is built upon the idea that lawyers and the government can serve as "trusted intermediaries." See Menell, Tailoring a Public Policy Exception to Trade Secret Protection, 105 CAL. L. REV. at 48-55. Federal law provides that Whoever, being an officer or employee of the United States or . . . any person acting [as an agent thereof including an employee of a private sector organization who is assigned to a government agency] publishes, divulges, discloses, or makes known in any manner or to any extent not authorized by law any . . . trade secrets . . . shall be fined under this title, or imprisoned not more than one year, or both; and shall be removed from office or employment.
18 U.S.C. §1905. This provision is essential to the operation of the federal courts and many agencies, such as the Food and Drug Administration and the Patent and Trademark Office, which routinely handle confidential information.
3. Would the DTSA immunity provision have assisted Edward Snowden in his effort to blow the whistle on the National Security Agency's surveillance activities? As Professor Menell cautions, the sealed disclosure/trusted intermediary safe harbor depends critically upon the trustworthiness of government officials to whom illegal activity is reported. Corrupting forces can influence government as well as private actors. President Nixon approved the bugging of his political rivals. Contractors can develop cozy relationships with the agencies with whom they work. The revolving door of hiring government officials as well as lobbying can undermine an agency's objectivity. Various anticorruption laws, such as the Ethics in Government Act of 1978, counteract those forces. See generally Robert G. Vaughn, The Successes and Failures of Whistle-Blower Laws (2012). Nonetheless, a government agency can be the source of the misconduct. The sealed disclosure/trusted intermediary safe harbor is ill-equipped to address such challenges, although it contributes to general awareness of whistleblowing and anti-corruption policies.
4. Construing Whistleblower Immunity. The first court to apply the whistleblower immunity provision treated the safe harbor as an affirmative defense. See Unum Corp. v. Loftus, 220 F.Supp.3d 143 (D. Mass. 2016). Without providing any specific evidence that Loftus sought to use the trade secret information for any purpose other than to report or investigate a suspected violation of law, Unum Group challenged Loftus's invocation of immunity and propounded costly discovery into a wide range of issues. The court declined Loftus's motion to dismiss the trade secret misappropriation claim, holding that discovery was required to determine whether the information was taken only for permissible purposes. In so doing, the court exposed Loftus to the full discovery and other burdens and risks of trade secret litigation-the very precarious circumstance that Congress sought to avoid. See Saucier v. Katz, 533 U.S. 194 (2001) (stating that immunity is not a "mere defense" to liability but an "immunity from suit," and stressing that immunity issues must be resolved as early as possible based on the public policies animating the grant of immunity). It also undermined government investigatory policies. The False Claims Act, for example, authorizes whistleblowers to file lawsuits in the name of the government under seal so as to enable the government to conduct its investigation of false claims without tipping off the targets of the investigation. as to protect the confidentiality of the government's investigation. See 31 U.S.C. §3730(b)(2); State Farm Fire \& Cas. Co. v. United States ex rel. Rigsby, 580 U.S. 26, 34-35 (2016). See Peter S. Menell, Misconstruing Whistleblower Immunity Under the Defend Trade Secrets Act, 1 NeV. L. Rev. F. 92, 97 (2017) (contending that where an employee asserts under oath that they disclosed company documents to government officials or an attorney in confidence solely for the purpose of reporting or investigating a suspected violation of law, the DTSA whistleblower regime requires the employer to come forward with concrete evidence that the employee has shared trade secret information outside of the protected categories or for an impermissible purpose; and that absent such evidence, the court should dismiss the trade secret case without prejudice).
5. Is there a risk that the mere assertion of whistleblowing could provide cover to an employee who actually intended to misuse trade secrets? Are there countervailing considerations that militate against this risk? How should the burden of proof be allocated where a defendant invokes the whistleblower immunity provision? In First Energy Corp. v. Pircio, 524 F.Supp.3d 732 (N.D. Ohio 2021), the court dismissed the trade secret suit where the pleadings showed that the defendant only shared confidential information with his counsel and a government agency. See id. at 738 (explaining that "discovery is not a fishing expedition, and Plaintiffs' speculation about what discovery may reveal does not suffice to raise the right to relief they claim above the speculative level," citing Twombly, 550 U.S. at 555, and Iqbal, 556 U.S. at 678-79). But how should courts handle situations where the defendant seeks to invoke the immunity provision without explaining the details? See Peter S. Menell, et al., Trade Secret Case MANAGEMENT JUDICIAL GUIDE §3.5.2.2 (2023).
6. Should the whistleblower immunity be broader, allowing for public disclosure of trade secrets in some circumstances? David Levine argues that some enterprises, like companies that make voting machines, are so important to the public that the way they work should be transparent. See David S. Levine, Secrecy and Unaccountability: Trade Secrets in Our Public Infrastructure, 59 Fla. L. Rev. 135 (2007).
7. Professor Deepa Varadarajan argues for a broader right to make beneficial uses of a secret, for instance, to improve on the original product or to protect public health. See Deepa Varadarajan, Trade Secret Fair Use, 83 Fordham L. Rev. 1401 (2014). Would such a regime be feasible?
8. Breach of Non-Disclosure Agreement to Report Allegedly Illegal Activity and the Public Policy Bar on Contract Enforcement. Notwithstanding the general enforceability of NDAs, a breach of NDA action against a person who reports allegedly illegal information to the government (or consults with an attorney regarding such matters) fits squarely within the public policy exception to contract enforcement. Courts generally bar enforcement of contracts and contract terms that are contrary to public policy and a growing list of statutes and agency rulings make the enforcement-or in some cases, even the inclusion of such terms in contracts-unlawful. See Restat. (SECOND) Contracts §178. The DTSA whistleblower immunity provision as well as whistleblower statutes (such as the False Claims Act) and state public policies provide a strong foundation for whistleblowers to defend breach of NDA cause of actions targeting reporting of suspected illegal activity on the ground that such lawsuits are against public policy. See, e.g., CAL. LABOR CODE §1102.5(b) (forbidding retaliation against an employee who discloses "information to a government or law enforcement agency, where the employee has reasonable cause to believe that the information discloses a violation of state or federal statute, or a violation or noncompliance with a state or federal rule or regulation"); See PETER S. MENELL, ET AL., TRADE SECRET CASE MANAGEMENT JUDICIAL GUIDE §2.8.1.1 (2023).

# PROBLEMS 

Problem II-15. Amalia Garcia has worked over the past three years as a software engineer at AutoDrive, a software company based in Mountain View, California, that is developing artificial intelligence software for autonomous vehicles. When she joined the company in 2018, she signed the following employment agreement:

Nondisclosure Agreement: During the time of my employment by AutoDrive, I will not disclose or use any Confidential Information except to the extent I am required to disclose or use such Confidential Information in the performance of my assigned duties; and I will use my best efforts to safeguard the Confidential Information and protect it against disclosure, misuse, espionage, loss and theft. After the termination of my employment at AutoDrive, I will not use any Confidential Information or disclose any Confidential Information to any person or entity who is not specifically authorized by AutoDrive to receive it.
AutoDrive employs strict controls over access to its facilities, servers, and software. As part of Amalia's work, she had access to AutoDrive's proprietary source code, database for developing its autonomous driving software, and testing data.

Soon after Amalia was hired, the U.S. Department of Defense entered into a contract with AutoDrive to develop software for military vehicles. The contract required that AutoDrive meet quarterly safety tests on a series of obstacle road tests intended to show the progression of AutoDrive's military vehicle autonomous driving software's performance. Amalia became aware that managers fabricated some of the testing data to inflate the efficacy of the software and to avoid the military withholding progress payments. She raised this concern with her bosses, who told her not to worry because the senior engineers on the team were confident that they could improve the software sufficiently to meet the final testing criteria at the conclusion of the contract. Her bosses instructed her to keep quiet about the problem.

Amalia became increasingly worried about AutoDrive's dishonesty and how it might reflect on her if this deception were revealed. She debated whether to report this problem to the government.
Her anxiety was somewhat alleviated last week when Tesla reached out to her and offered her a position on its autonomous driving team. She had interviewed with Tesla before she was hired by AutoDrive, but was not offered a job at that time. Amalia accepted the Tesla position and tendered her resignation from AutoDrive.

Before she exited AutoDrive, Amalia copied the AutoDrive software and testing data onto a memory storage device and has kept the device secure at her home. AutoDrive detected her copying of its source code and data just prior to her departure. The company filed a trade secret complaint against her alleging trade secret misappropriation and violation of her employment agreement. She comes to you for advice.
(a) Does Amalia's employment agreement comply with the Defend Trade Secrets Act? Why or why not? If not, what are the ramifications?
(b) Can AutoDrive succeed in a suit against her for trade secret misappropriation?
(c) What other advice would you provide her about minimizing her legal exposure and opposing AutoDrive's lawsuit?

Problem II-16. Sarah Kopple works at Complex Systems Inc. (CSI), a software forensics company that develops expert artificial intelligence software programs for law enforcement agencies. These tools, which purport to predict recidivism rates of criminal defendants, are routinely used in criminal sentencing recommendations and parole hearings. Sarah is concerned that this software is prone to disparate racial impacts due to the limitations of the demographic data and models used. CSI carefully guards this software and data as trade secrets. All CSI employees have signed nondisclosure agreements.

Sarah comes to you for legal advice about her concerns that CSI software might inadvertently produce disparate impacts in violation of civil rights laws. Can she share CSI's proprietary software and data with you and the government in an effort to determine whether these programs violate civil rights? What if you were defending a client being sentenced using the CSI software? Can she or you bring this information to the attention of newspaper reporters?

# E. AGREEMENTS TO KEEP SECRETS 

As we have seen, trade secret law imposes certain limitations on the owner of a trade secret. To qualify for trade secret protection, information must not be generally known, must be valuable, and must not be disclosed. But can an owner of information avoid those restrictions by requiring others to agree to keep the information secret, whether or not the information meets the requirements for protection? The question is fundamental in intellectual property law.

Licenses are generally considered good from an economic standpoint because they promote efficiency. The company (or individual) that develops a new product might not be in the best position to market it, particularly if the invention has uses in several different fields. Without the ability to license the technology, the inventor would either have to sell the product directly, use it incompletely or inefficiently, enter a new field itself, or forgo commercializing the technology. Private contracting allows the market to reorder itself efficiently and still determine the appropriate reward for invention. But can or should a trade secret licensing agreement continue to be enforceable after the trade secret has become public through no fault of the licensee?

Warner-Lambert Pharmaceutical Co. v. John J. Reynolds, Inc. United States District Court for the Southern District of New York 178 F.Supp. 655 (S.D.N.Y. 1959)

# BRYAN, DISTRICT JUDGE. 

Plaintiff sues under the Federal Declaratory Judgment Act, 28 U.S.C. §§2201 and 2202, for a judgment declaring that it is no longer obligated to make periodic payments to defendants based on its manufacture or sale of the well known product "Listerine," under agreements made between Dr. J. J. Lawrence and J. W. Lambert in 1881, and between Dr. Lawrence and Lambert Pharmacal Company in 1885. Plaintiff also seeks to recover the payments made to defendants pursuant to these agreements since the commencement of the action.

Plaintiff is a Delaware corporation which manufactures and sells Listerine, among other pharmaceutical products. It is the successor in interest to Lambert and LambertPharmacal Company which acquired the formula for Listerine from Dr. Lawrence under the agreements in question. Defendants are the successors in interest to Dr. Lawrence. . . .

For some seventy-five years plaintiff and its predecessors have been making the periodic payments based on the quantity of Listerine manufactured or sold which are called for by the agreements in suit. The payments have totaled more than twenty-two million dollars and are presently in excess of one million five hundred thousand dollars yearly. . . .
[J.J. Lawrence developed the formula for Listerine in 1880. He licensed the secret formula exclusively to Lambert (later Warner-Lambert) in 1881 under a contract which provided that]

I, Jordan Lambert, hereby agree for myself, my heirs, executors and assigns to pay monthly to Dr. Lawrence, his heirs, executors or assigns, the sum of twenty dollars for each and every gross of said Listerine hereafter sold by myself, my heirs, executors or assigns.
[The amount was reduced by subsequent agreement to $6.00 per gross.]
The agreements between the parties contemplated, it is alleged, "the periodic payment of royalties to Lawrence for the use of a trade secret, to wit, the secret formula for" Listerine. After some modifications made with Lawrence's knowledge and approval, the formula was introduced on the market. The composition of the compound has remained the same since then and it is still being manufactured and sold by the plaintiff.
It is then alleged that the "trade secret" (the formula for Listerine) has gradually become a matter of public knowledge through the years following 1881 and prior to 1949, and has been published in the United States Pharmacopo[e]ia, the National Formulary and the Journal of the American Medical Association, and also as a result of proceedings brought against plaintiff's predecessor by the Federal Trade Commission. Such publications were not the fault of plaintiff or its predecessors. . . .

# (1) 

The plaintiff seems to feel that the 1881 and 1885 agreements are indefinite and unclear, at least as to the length of time during which they would continue in effect. I do not find them to be so. These agreements seem to me to be plain and unambiguous.

The obligation to pay on each and every gross of Listerine continues as long as this preparation is manufactured or sold by Lambert and his successors. It comes to an end when they cease to manufacture or sell the preparation . . . The plain meaning of the language used in these agreements is simply that Lambert's obligation to pay is coextensive with manufacture or sale of Listerine by him and his successors. . . .

## (3)

However, plaintiff urges with vigor that the agreement must be differently construed because it involved the conveyance of a secret formula. The main thrust of its argument is that despite the language which the parties used the court must imply a limitation upon Lambert's obligation to pay measured by the length of time that the Listerine formula remained secret.

To sustain this theory plaintiff relies upon a number of cases involving the obligations of licensees of copyrights or patents to make continuing payments to the owner or licensor, and argues that these cases are controlling here. . . .
... [A]ll [these cases hold] is that when parties agree upon a license under a patent or copyright the court will assume, in the absence of express language to the contrary, that their actual intention as to the term is measured by the definite term of the underly ing grant fixed by statute.

It is quite plain that were it not for the patent and copyright features of such license agreements the term would be measured by use. . . .

In the patent and copyright cases the parties are dealing with a fixed statutory term and the monopoly granted by that term. This monopoly, created by Congress, is designed to preserve exclusivity in the grantee during the statutory term and to release the patented or copyrighted material to the general public for general use thereafter. This is the public policy of the statutes in reference to which such contracts are made and it is against this background that the parties to patent and copyright license agreements contract.

Here, however, there is no such public policy. The parties are free to contract with respect to a secret formula or trade secret in any manner which they determine for their own best interests. A secret formula or trade secret may remain secret indefinitely. It may be discovered by someone else almost immediately after the agreement is entered into. Whoever discovers it for himself by legitimate means is entitled to its use.

But that does not mean that one who acquires a secret formula or a trade secret through a valid and binding contract is then enabled to escape from an obligation to which he bound himself simply because the secret is discovered by a third party or by the general public. I see no reason why the court should imply such a term or condition in a contract providing on its face that payment shall be co-extensive with use. To do so here would be to rewrite the contract for the parties without any indication that they intended such a result. . . .

One who acquires a trade secret or secret formula takes it subject to the risk that there be a disclosure. The inventor makes no representation that the secret is nondiscoverable. All the inventor does is to convey the knowledge of the formula or process which is unknown to the purchaser and which in so far as both parties then know is unknown to any one else. The terms upon which they contract with reference to this subject matter are purely up to them and are governed by what the contract they enter into provides.

If they desire the payments or royalties should continue only until the secret is disclosed to the public it is easy enough for them to say so. But there is no justification for implying such a provision if the parties do not include it in their contract, particularly where the language which they use by fair intendment provides otherwise. . . .

# COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS 

1. The term of trade secret protection is limited, not by a fixed term of years but by the length of time the information remains secret. Indeed, trade secrets become a part of the public domain once secrecy is lost, and their owner cannot prevent even direct copying. It seems odd that contract law would require royalty payments from WarnerLambert for 80 years (or indeed 160 or more years, as Listerine is still sold commercially), while every other competitor can copy the formula for free. ^6 Are there sound reasons for such a rule?

One such reason might be the economic value of freedom of contract. If a party agrees to pay based on something other than an IP right for as long as it uses a product, it is free to do so. See Nova Chem., Inc. v. Sekisui Plastics Co., 579 F.3d 319, 329 (3d Cir. 2009) ("Here, in contrast [to Warner-Lambert], nothing in the License Agreement suggests that the parties intended any ongoing obligations with respect to trade secrets after the 1995 termination of NOVA's obligation to maintain the secrecy of Sekisui's technical information."). Presumably, the amount of the royalty payments as well as their duration will reflect the value of the secret to the buyer, discounted by the likelihood of public disclosure. But the obligation to pay for a patent or copyright expires with the IP right. That is not simply a default rule, as the court suggests. Rather, extending the payment obligation beyond expiration constitutes misuse. See Meehan v.

PPG Indus., 802 F.2d 881, 886 (7th Cir. 1986); Boggild v. Kenner Prods., 776 F.2d 15, 1320- 21 (6th Cir. 1985). Why does contract law allow a party to extend the duration of a trade secret beyond the loss of protection?
2. The Warner-Lambert result is controversial. The Restatement (Third) of Unfair COMPetition takes the position that "[a] promise to refrain from the use or disclosure of commercial information is ordinarily unenforceable unless the information is sufficiently secret to justify the restraint." See §41, Comment d. Further, the RESTATEMENT notes that "because of the public interest in preserving access to information that is in the public domain, such an agreement will not ordinarily estop a defendant from contesting the existence of a trade secret." §39, Comment d. A number of cases support this view, which seems at odds with Warner-Lambert. See, e.g., Gary Van Zeeland Talent, Inc. v. Sandas, 267 N.W.2d 242 (Wis. 1978); Sarkes Tarzian, Inc. v. Audio Devices, Inc., 166 F.Supp. 250 (S.D. Cal. 1958), aff'd, 283 F.2d 695 (9th Cir. 1960).

On the other hand, the Federal Circuit has seemingly endorsed the Warner-Lambert approach, holding that the issuance of a patent did not extinguish the confidentiality obligation imposed by a nondisclosure agreement, even though the issuance of the patent destroyed the trade secret that was the basis for the agreement. See Celleritas Technologies v. Rockwell Int'l Corp., 150 F.3d 1354 (Fed. Cir. 1998). The equities in that case might be thought to favor the plaintiff: the patent was held invalid, and so offered the plaintiff no relief against a theft of its technology. Cf. Aronson v. Quick Point Pencil Co., 440 U.S. 257 (1979) (holding that the contract obligated licensee to continue paying (reduced) royalties on an invention even though licensor's patent application had been rejected). But isn't that the risk a trade secret owner takes in deciding to patent (and therefore disclose) her invention? The Seventh Circuit has held that courts had no power to review business nondisclosure agreements for reasonableness, even though employee agreements were subject to a reasonableness requirement. See IDX Systems v. Epic Systems, 285 F.3d 581 (7th Cir. 2002). And in Bernier v. Merrill Air Engineers, 770 A.2d 97 (Me. 2001), the Maine Supreme Court held that an employee violated a nondisclosure agreement by disclosing information that did not qualify as a trade secret.
3. Should such restrictions be governed by intellectual property law-making them unenforceable-or by contract law, which presumably would enforce them? The answer to that question will determine whether intellectual property laws (including trade secret laws) constitute binding governmental rules balancing competing interests or merely "default" rules that parties may opt to change. In practice, the courts have walked a hazily defined middle line, refusing to hold that intellectual property statutes preempt contracts which alter their terms, but also refusing to enforce certain contracts that go "too far" in upsetting the balance the intellectual property laws have struck. In Aqua Connect, Inc. v. Code Rebel, Inc., 2012 WL 469737 (C.D. Cal. Feb. 13, 2012), Aqua Connect alleged that Code Rebel misappropriated its trade secrets by reverse engineering in violation of an End User License Agreement (EULA) which prohibited reverse engineering. The court dismissed the claim on the ground that California UTSA provides that reverse engineering "shall not be considered improper means." The court noted that although a breach of the EULA may support a cognizable breach of contract claim, it concluded that "the mere presence of the EULA does not convert reverse engineering into an 'improper means' within the definition of California trade secret law."
4. What remedies are appropriate in a case in which a court enforces a contract that extends beyond the scope of trade secret law?

# F. DEPARTING EMPLOYEES 

Many of the thorniest issues in trade secret (and contract) law arise when employees leave a company in order either to start their own business or to take a job elsewhere. Such cases present a fundamental clash of rights between an employee's mobility and ability to pursue gainful employment and a former employer's protection of its trade secrets. Judge Adams captures the tradeoff in the following excerpt from SI Handling Systems v. Heisley, 753 F.2d 1244 (3d Cir. 1985) (Adams, J., concurring):

When deciding the equitable issues surrounding the request for a trade secret injunction, it would seem that a court cannot act as a pure engineer or scientist, assessing the technical import of the information in question. Rather, the court must also consider economic factors since the very definition of "trade secret" requires an assessment of the competitive advantage a particular item of information affords to a business. Similarly, among the elements to be weighed in determining trade secret status are the value of the information to its owner and to competitors, and the ease or difficulty with which the information may be properly acquired or duplicated.

While the majority may be correct in suggesting that the trial court need not always "engage in extended analysis of the public interest," the court on occasion must apply the elements of sociology. This is so since trade secret cases frequently implicate the important countervailing policies served on one hand by protecting a business person from unfair competition stemming from the usurpation of trade secrets, and on the other by permitting an individual to pursue unhampered the occupation for which he or she is best suited. "Trade secrets are not . . . so important to society that the interests of employees, competitors and competition should automatically be relegated to a lower position whenever trade secrets are proved to exist." Robison, The Confidence Game: An Approach to the Law About Trade Secrets, 25 ARIZ. L. REV. 347, 382 (1983).

These observations take on more force, I believe, when a case such as the present one involves the concept of "know-how." Under Pennsylvania law an employee's general knowledge, skill, and experience are not trade secrets. Thus in theory an employer generally may not inhibit the manner in which an employee uses his or her knowledge, skill, and experience-even if these were acquired during employment. When these attributes of the employee are inextricably related to the information or process that constitutes an employer's competitive advantage-as increasingly seems to be the case in newer, high technology industries-the legal questions confronting the court necessarily become bound up with competing public policies.

It is noteworthy that in such cases the balance struck by the Pennsylvania courts apparently has favored greater freedom for employees to pursue a chosen profession. The courts have recognized that someone who has worked in a particular field cannot be expected to forego the accumulated skills, knowledge, and experience gained before the employee changes jobs. Such qualifications are obviously very valuable to an employee seeking to sell his services in the marketplace. A person leaving one employer and going into the marketplace will seek to compete in the area of his or her greatest aptitude. In light of the highly mobile nature of our society, and as the economy becomes increasingly comprised of highly skilled or high-tech jobs, the individual's economic interests will more and more be buffeted by competitive advantage. Courts must be cautious not to strike a balance that unduly disadvantages the individual worker. . . .

In my view a proper injunction necessarily would impose the minimum restraint upon the free utilization of employee skill consistent with denying unfaithful employees an advantage from misappropriation of information. Thus, as I see it, the district court, on remand, should fashion an injunction that extends only so long as is essential to negate any unfair advantage that may have been gained by the appellants.
Id. at 1266-69. The majority opinion in SI Handling partially upheld a finding that two former employees had misappropriated trade secrets, but it vacated an injunction against them in order for the district court to reconsider its scope.

Professor Camilla Hrdy argues that excluding "general knowledge, skill, and experience" from the scope of trade secrets in departing employee cases is an important protection "intended to preserve an employee's right to improve her skills on the job and thereafter transfer those skills to a different job." See Camilla Hrdy, The General Knowledge, Skill, and Experience Paradox, 60 B.C. L. Rev. 1 (2019). She notes that this requires a balancing not present in other trade secrets cases. It's not enough to decide whether information is generally known to the world at large. If that information is part of an employee's learning of skills, the employee should be free to use it even if others don't know it.

Departing employee cases constitute over two-thirds of all trade secret cases. See David S. Almeling, et al., A Statistical Analysis of Trade Secret Litigation in State Courts, 46 GONZ. L. REV. 57, 60 (2011). This section explores the thorny issues surrounding departing issues. Section 1 discusses restrictions on disclosure of a company's information (trade secret and otherwise) following employment. Section 2 addresses ownership of employee inventions. Section 3 examines the enforceability of nonsolicitation agreements. Section 4 discusses the enforceability of noncompetition agreements.
# 1. Confidentiality and Use of Trade Secrets 

Nearly all companies require their employees to sign a confidentiality (or nondisclosure) agreement. These agreements generally recite that the employee will receive confidential information during their employment, and that they undertake to keep such information secret and not to use it for anyone other than the employer. Such agreements are essential to the establishment of trade secret protection-serving as a relatively low-cost effort to prevent disclosure-and are generally enforceable against current and former employees. Thus, there is a confidential relationship in most employee cases.

Even if there is no express nondisclosure agreement, some courts imply one. In Winston Research Corp. v. 3M Co., 350 F.2d 134 (9th Cir. 1965), the court dismissed an argument that an employee owed no obligation of confidentiality in his own inventions:

Winston argues that information is protected from disclosure only if communicated to the employee by the employer who is seeking protection, and that the information involved in this case was not disclosed by [3M] to the employees subsequently hired by Winston, but rather was developed by these employees themselves, albeit while employed by [3M].

We need not examine the soundness of the rule for which Winston contends, or its applicability to a case such as this in which a group of specialists engaged in related facets of a single development project change their employer. . . . [A]n obligation not to disclose may arise from circumstances other than communication in confidence by the employer. It may also rest upon an express or implied agreement. In the present case, an agreement not to disclose might be implied from [3M]'s elaborate efforts to maintain the secrecy of its development program, and the employees' knowledge of those efforts and participation in them. In any event, [3M] and its employees entered into express written agreements binding the latter not to disclose confidential information, and these agreements did not exclude information which the employee himself contributed.
Id. at 140 .
Employers sometimes attempt to limit an employee's use of information that does not constitute a trade secret. This issue parallels the problem of restrictive license provisions raised in Section E-are employers limited by the intellectual property laws to protecting only trade secrets or are they free to impose additional restrictions on their employees? Courts struggle with this issue, with the majority concluding that "reasonable" contract restrictions on use or disclosure of information by employees are enforceable even in the absence of a protectable trade secret. See Bernier v. Merrill Air Engineers, 770 A.2d 97 (Me. 2001); 12 RoGER MilgRIM, MilgRIM ON TRADE SECRETS §3.05[1][a], at 3-209 to 3-210. Many such restrictions, however, are subject to the public policy limits discussed below. "Overly broad nondisclosure agreements, while not specifically preventing an employee from entering into competition with the former employer, raise the same policy concerns about restraining competition as noncompete clauses" and must be reasonably limited in time and scope. See TLS Mgmt. \& Mktg. Servs. v. Rodriguez-Toledo, 966 F.3d 46, 57-58 (1st Cir. 2020) (invalidating nondisclosure agreement purporting to prohibit "information that 'is not in fact confidential'" (citation omitted)); see also Brown v. TGS Mgmt. Co., 271 Cal.Rptr. 303 (Ct. App. 2020); Nagler v. Garcia, 370 F.Appx. 678, 681 (6th Cir. 2010); Assured Partners v. Schmitt, 44 N.E.3d 463, 475-76 (Ill. Ct. App. 2015).

As part of its effort to ban non-compete agreements, the Federal Trade Commission has also targeted overboard NDAs, providing that "[a] non-disclosure agreement between an employer and a worker that is written so broadly that it effectively precludes the worker from working in the same field after the conclusion of the worker's employment with the employer [might be] a de facto non-compete clause." See Federal Trade Commission, FTC Proposes Rule to Ban Noncompete Clauses, Which Hurt Workers and Harm Competition §910.1(~b)(2) (1) (Jan. 5, 2023). District courts split on whether the FTC's ban on noncompetes exceeded its power. See Ryan LLC v. Federal Trade Comm'n, 746 F.Supp.3d 369 (N.D. Tex. 2024) (enjoining rule). At this writing the rule is on hold following the change of administration.

# 2. Ownership of Employee Inventions 

## i. The Common Law Obligation to Assign Inventions

At common law, if there is no contract, ownership of inventions-including ownership of patent rights-was determined according to an employee's status under a long line of common law employee invention cases. In general, employees fall into one of three categories: (1) employees "hired to invent," which results in employer ownership of the invention; (2) employees who invent on the employer's time or using its resources, which results in a limited, nonexclusive "shop right" on the part of the employer to practice the invention; and (3) an employee's "independent invention," in which case the employee owns the invention. See generally United States v. Dubilier Condenser Corp., 289 U.S. 178 (1933); John C. Stedman, Employer-Employee Relations, in FredRIK NeUmeYer, The Employed InVentOR In The United States 30, 40-41 (1971).

The first category is relatively straightforward: if the employee was hired to invent, what else would the employer be buying except the resulting inventions? It seems logical to extend this treatment to consultants and others who are not "employees" in the strict sense. Robert P. Merges, Intellectual Property and the Costs of Commercial Exchange: A Review Essay, 93 MiCH. L. REV. 1570 (1995) (highlighting the role of intellectual property in structuring non-employment-based organizations, such as consulting companies and joint ventures).

Category (2) reflects situations where employers have less than a complete claim to the invention, but where the employer's facilities or resources are combined with the inventor's talent and industry to produce the invention. The employee owns it, but the employer is compensated by receiving a limited right to practice the invention. Cf. McElmurry v. Arkansas Power \& Light Co., 27 U.S.P.Q.2d 1129, 1135 n. 15 (Fed. Cir.
1993) (upholding shop right in employer where inventor/patentee was a consultant); Notably, however, that shop right does not include the right to sell the invention to others. Beriont v. GTE Labs., Inc., 535 F. App'x 919 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

An employee's obligation to refrain from using an employer's trade secrets looks more onerous when it is the employee who came up with the secret. In Wexler v. Greenberg, 160 A.2d 430 (Pa. 1960), the Pennsylvania Supreme Court concluded that a departing employee was entitled to take formulas he had developed at his prior employer to work for a competitor. Despite the fact that the employee, Greenberg, was the chief chemist at the plaintiff, the court concluded that he was not in fact "hired to invent" and therefore owned the inventions he made.

The Wexler result, while it may seem fair, is not the majority rule. Even in Pennsylvania, Wexler is not always followed. See Healthcare Affiliated Services v. Lippancy, 701 F.Supp. 1142, 1155 (W.D. Pa. 1988) (rejecting Wexler analysis, emphasizing that although defendant developed inventions on his own, he did so using knowledge and information made available by the plaintiff employer); but see Fidelity Fund v. DiSanto, 500 A.2d 431 (Sup. Ct. Pa. 1985) (denying recovery against exemployee salesman partly on the basis that he developed client contacts himself during employment).

Category (3) covers cases where the employee invents on his or her own time, outside the field of employment. See Dubilier, supra. As the next section explains, employers sometimes seek to own such inventions through assignment agreements.

# ii. Assignment Agreements 

Many companies require their employees to assign inventions made during their employment to the employer. These agreements are generally enforceable with regard to inventions made within the scope of employment. This means that the common law rules just discussed rarely apply today.

In some cases, assignment agreements extend to all inventions made by an employee, whether or not at the employer's facilities, during work hours, or within the scope of employment. Several states forbid such broad assignments. CALIFORNIA LABOR CODE §2870 prohibits employers from requiring assignment of "invention[s] that the employee developed entirely on his or her own time without using the employer's equipment, supplies, facilities, or trade secret information" unless the invention relates to the employer's current or demonstrably anticipated business. Other states have similar "freedom to create" limitations on employer assignment agreements. See, e.g., Minn. Stat. Ann. §181.78 (1980); N.C. Gen. Stat. §66-57.1 to 57.2 (1981); WASH. REV. CODE AnN. §49.44.140 (1987). By contrast, NEVADA REVISED Statutes §600.500 automatically assigns inventions to an employer provided they were developed in the course of employment and relate to the scope of the employee's work, whether or not the employee signs an invention assignment agreement.
# COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS 

1. Encouraging Employee Inventions through Bonuses, Stock Options, and Other Rewards. Some companies afford employed inventors a bonus or financial share in inventions that they develop. See Richard S. Gruner, Corporate Patents: Optimizing Organizational Responses to Innovation Opportunities and Invention Discoveries, 10 Marq. Intell. Prop. L. Rev. 1, 30-31, 30 n. 83 (2006) (describing bonus award systems); Julie L. Davis \& Suzanne S. Harrison, Edison In The Boardroom: How Leading Companies Realize Value from their Intellectual Assets 29 (2002) (discussing patent incentive systems). Nonetheless, commentators argue that overbroad assignment agreements dull innovation incentives and undermine economic growth. See Orly Lobel, Talent Wants to be Free (2014) (arguing for an open market for labor); Henrik D. Parker, Reform for Rights of Employed Inventors, 57 S. CAL. L. REV. 603 (1984) (calling for federal legislation granting employed inventors greater control over, and interests in, their inventions); Shashwat Alok \& Krishnamurthy Subramanian, Does Strengthening the Property Rights of Employee-Inventors Spur Innovation? Empirical Evidence on Freedom-to-Create Laws Passed by U.S. States, 66 J. L. \& ECON. 369 (2023) (finding that states that adopted limits on assignments saw more and better employee inventions) but see Robert P. Merges, The Law and Economics of Employee Inventions, 13 HARv. J.L. \& TECh. 1 (1999) (defending employer ownership of inventions).
2. Can Former Employees Challenge Assigned Patents? Under the patent assignor estoppel doctrine, which we address in Chapter III(F)(1), courts have long barred someone who sells a patent or patent application from attacking the validity of the assigned patents in a subsequent patent infringement litigation absent exceptional circumstances. That meant that employees who signed assignment agreements and later moved to a competing company or started their own could not later claim that patents on the inventions they made at their prior employer were invalid. In Minerva Surgical, Inv., v. Hologic, Inc., 594 U.S. 559 (2021), the Supreme Court substantially cabined the assignor estoppel doctrine, holding that it should not apply to a patent assignor who has not explicitly or implicitly represented the validity of an assigned patent. Another other limits on the doctrine, the Court specifically noted that employee inventors should not later be barred from challenging their own patents based on assignor estoppel where they assign future inventions to an employer as part of a standard invention assignment agreement.
3. Confirmatory Assignment Agreements. In the aftermath of Minerva, companies will likely require employee inventors to sign confirmatory assignment agreements at the time that patents based on the employee's work issue or prior to the employee's departure representing that the issued patent(s) or inventions made during their employment are valid. Will this practice largely nullify the effects of the Minerva decision? Is an employee "conveying something for value" if they sign a form "confirmation" that the employer already owns their invention? Does the need for such agreements afford departing employees bargaining leverage? Should Congress eliminate or trim the assignor estoppel doctrine so as to ensure that invalid patents are not insulated from attack?
4. Abandonment for Trade Secret Nonuse? Professors Camilla Hrdy and Mark Lemley argue that employees should be able to take their own inventions to a new company if their employer does not use them. See Camilla Hrdy \& Mark A. Lemley, Abandoning Trade Secrets, 73 Stan. L. Rev. 1 (2021). Should abandonment apply to assigned patents as well? How would the former employees know if and how their prior inventions are being used by their former employer? What about negative trade secrets, such as the knowledge that a chemical composition does not cure a disease?

# PROBLEMS 

Problem II-17. Prior to graduate school, Mark Core worked full-time for TRW, a conglomerate corporation spanning automotive, aerospace, and electronics technologies. Core's employment agreement assigned to TRW all inventions that "relate to the business or activities of TRW" while reserving any inventions developed "entirely on his own time" that did not use TRW equipment, facilities, or trade secrets or relate to TRW's business. Upon entering a Ph.D. program funded by TRW, Core continued worked part time for TRW.

During graduate school, Core invented and patented techniques for improving optical signaling (transmitting information through fiber optics). A dispute arose over ownership of the patent.

The record before the district court established that Dr. Core sought funding for his Ph.D. studies through TRW's fellowship program; TRW provided that funding, the Ph.D. studies being sufficiently connected to TRW's business; and TRW expected to benefit from Dr. Core's participation in TRW's fellowship program at least through Dr. Core's return to full-time employment for one year after the completion of his Ph.D.. TRW's fellowship program required Dr. Core's Ph.D. research to "be in an engineering or scientific field of study related to [his] current or anticipated job responsibilities" and also required Dr. Core to have an internal TRW sponsor with whom he met regularly to discuss his educational or research progress.

Dr. Core and TRW offer competing views as to what it means for an invention to be "developed entirely on [Dr. Core's] own time." In Core's view, TRW's time is any time Dr. Core spent working "on the clock" on commercial projects at TRW's specific direction, and Dr. Core's "own time" is everything else (including his PhD research). TRW, by contrast, asserts that TRW's time also includes any time Dr. Core spent participating in the TRW fellowship program, with its substantial support conditional on pursuing the Ph.D. work, reporting on the work, and returning to TRW for a period. How should a court resolve this controversy?

Problem II-18. In 2010, Dr. Oscar Livingston and Dr. Tina Fenton were working for Bio-Fab. Each of them signed an agreement that provided:
(a) Employee agrees to disclose promptly to the Company [Bio-Fab] the full details of any and all ideas, processes, recipes, trademarks and service marks, works, inventions, discoveries, marketing and business ideas, and improvements or enhancements to any of the foregoing ("IP"), that Employee conceives, develops, creates, or reduces to practice alone or with the aid of others during the term of Employee's employment with the Company. . . .
(b) Employee shall assign to the Company, without further consideration, Employee's entire right to any IP described in the preceding subsection, which shall be the sole and exclusive property of the Company whether or not patentable.

Drs. Livingston and Fenton left Bio-Fab in April 2012, and together they formed 1000X Genomics in July 2012. By August 2012, 1000X filed the first of several provisional patent applications that focused on using microcapsules in capsule partitions or droplet partitions (referred to as capsule-in-capsule and capsule-in-droplets architecture, respectively) for DNA barcoding, a method of identification using a short section of DNA from a specific gene or genes. By January 2013, the 1000X inventors had conceived of a different architecture: "gel bead in emulsion" (GEM). The GEM architecture involves "partitioning nucleic acids, DNA or RNA, in droplets together with gel beads that are used to deliver the barcodes into the droplet," where the "barcodes are released from the gel beads using a stimulus."

In 2018, 1000X asserted these patents against Bio-Fab. As part of its defense, BioFab argued that it co-owns the 1000X patents asserted against it because Drs. Livingston and Fenton conceived of the ideas embodied in the patents while they were still employed by Bio-Fab.

The evidence at trial showed that Drs. Livingston and Fenton worked chiefly on droplet-in-droplet architecture while at Bio-Fab and that this architecture is different from the GEM architecture that 1000X patented, but their GEM architecture was inspired by the work they did at Bio-Fab and so were based on work done in the scope of their employment.

How should a court rule on the patent ownership issue? What considerations inform your determination? Does it matter if the language of the patent extends beyond the new GEM architecture to cover droplet-in-droplet microcapsules?

# iii. Trailer Clauses 


^6 In 2020, the right to continue to receive royalties under the contract sold for $561,000. See Ryan Davis, Rare Listerine Royalty Auction Tied to 1881 Contract Flub, LAW360 (Jul. 21, 2020) (noting that contract generated $32,000 in royalty payments for 2019).