
UPA (1914) §§ 8, 18(a), 18(f), 40
UPA (1997) §§ 102(2), 102(4), 102(23), 401(a), 401(j), 403, 802, 806
The common law and the Uniform Partnership Acts each provide default rules governing a partner's right to share in profits, to be paid for services, or to receive interest on contributed capital or money loaned to the firm. Likewise, the common law and the Uniform Partnership Act provide fallback rules governing a partner's responsibility to share in any losses experienced by the partnership. In the archetypal general partnership, where two persons each contribute equal amounts of money and services to the business, the default rules are consonant with what most persons would presumably have bargained for-an equal sharing of profits and losses. Moreover, the default rule that a partner is not entitled to receive compensation for her services or interest on her contributed capital is of little importance; each partner is contributing equally and will share equally in the expected profits from the venture.

The fair result is less clear when partners' contributions are less obviously equal. For example, if one partner contributes only her expertise and future services, while the other partner agrees to contribute money but no services, should the partner contributing services be entitled to compensation for her services even if the partners have never discussed it? Should her contribution of services be treated as a type of contribution of capital? If so, how should that contribution be valued? The following two cases explore the application of the statutory and common law default rules in non-archetypal settings.

## Kovacik v. Reed <br> Supreme Court of California, 1957 <br> 315 P.2d 314

Schauer, Justice.
In this suit for dissolution of a joint venture and for an accounting, defendant appeals from a judgment that plaintiff recover from defendant one half the losses of the venture. We have concluded that inasmuch as the parties agreed the plaintiff was to supply the money and defendant the labor to carry on the venture, defendant is correct in his contention that the trial court erred in holding him liable for one half the monetary losses, and that the judgment should therefore be reversed.

The appeal is taken upon a settled statement. . . From the "condensed statement of the oral proceedings" included in the settled statement, it appears that plaintiff, a licensed building contractor in San Francisco, operated his contracting business as a sole proprietorship under the fictitious name of "Asbestos Siding Company." Defendant had for a number of years worked for various building contractors in that city as a job superintendent and estimator.

Early in November, 1952, Kovacik (plaintiff) told Reed (defendant) that Kovacik had an opportunity to do kitchen remodeling work for Sears Roebuck Company in San Francisco and asked Reed to become his job superintendent and estimator in this venture. Kovacik said that he had about $10,000.00 to invest in the venture and that, if Reed would superintend and estimate the jobs, Kovacik would share the profits with Reed on a 50-50 basis. Kovacik did not ask Reed to agree to share any loss that might result and Reed did not offer to share any such loss. The subject of a possible loss was not discussed in the inception of this venture. Reed accepted Kovacik's proposal and commenced work for the venture shortly after November 1, 1952. . . . Reed's only contribution was his own labor. Kovacik provided all of the venture's financing through the credit of Asbestos Siding Company, although at times Reed purchased materials for the jobs in his own name or on his account for which he was reimbursed. . . .
"The venture bid on and was awarded a number of . . . remodeling jobs . . . in San Francisco. Reed worked on all of the jobs as job superintendent. . . . During . . . August, 1953, Kovacik, who at that time had had all of the financial records of the venture in his possession, . . . informed Reed that the venture had been unprofitable and demanded contribution from Reed as to amounts which Kovacik claimed to have advanced in excess of the income received from the venture. Reed at no time promised, represented or agreed that he was liable for any of the venture's losses and he consistently and without exception refused to contribute to or pay any of the loss resulting from the venture. . . . The venture was terminated on August 31, 1953."

Kovacik thereafter instituted this proceeding, seeking an accounting of the affairs of the venture and to recover from Reed one half of the losses. Despite the evidence above set forth from the statement of the oral proceedings, showing that at no time had defendant agreed to be liable for any of the losses, the trial court "found" - more accurately, we think, concluded as a matter of law - that "plaintiff and defendant were to share equally all their joint venture profits and losses between them," and that defendant "agreed to share equally in the profits and losses of said joint venture." Following an accounting taken by a referee appointed by the court, judgment was rendered awarding plaintiff recovery against defendant of some $4,340, as one half the monetary losses ^1 found by the referee to have been sustained by the joint venture.

It is the general rule that in the absence of an agreement to the contrary the law presumes that partners and joint adventurers intended to participate equally in the profits and losses of the common enterprise, irrespective of any inequality in the amounts each contributed to the capital employed in the venture, with the losses being shared by them in the same proportions as they share the profits.

However, it appears that in the cases in which the above stated general rule has been applied, each of the parties had contributed capital consisting of either money or land or other tangible property, or else was to receive compensation for services rendered to the common undertaking which was to be paid before computation of the profits or losses. Where, however, as in the present case, one partner or joint adventurer contributes the money capital as against the other's skill and labor, all the cases cited, and which our research has discovered, hold that neither party is liable to the other for contribution for any loss sustained. Thus, upon loss of the money the party who contributed it is not entitled to recover any part of it from the party who contributed only services. The rationale of this rule, as expressed in Heran v. Hall, 40 Ky. 159 (1840), and Meadows v. Mocquot, 110 Ky. 220 (1901), is that where one party contributes money and the other contributes services, then in the event of a loss each would lose his own capital the one his money and the other his labor. Another view would be that in such a situation the parties have, by their agreement to share equally in profits, agreed that the value of their contributions the money on the one hand and the labor on the other were likewise equal; it would follow that upon the loss, as here, of both money and labor, the parties have shared equally in the losses. Actually, of course, plaintiff here lost only some $8,680 or somewhat less than the $10,000 which he originally proposed and agreed to invest. . . .

It follows that the conclusion of law upon which the judgment in favor of plaintiff for recovery from defendant of one half the monetary losses depends is untenable, and that the judgment should be reversed.

# Shamloo v. Ladd <br> Court of Appeal of California, Second District, 2003 2003 WL 68054 

Turner, Presiding Judge.

## I. Introduction

Defendant and cross-complainant, Rick Ladd, individually and doing business as Inner Circle Graphics, appeals from a judgment entered on dissolution of a partnership, known as Ginnytex Company, Inc. ("Ginnytex"). The partnership was between Mr. Ladd and plaintiff and cross-defendant, Farhad Shamloo.

## II. Background

On November 30, 1999, Mr. Shamloo filed a complaint for: partnership contract breach (first); fiduciary duty breach (second); conversion (third); partnership dissolution; accounting (fourth); and appointment of receiver (fifth). The complaint alleged that around July 1995, Mr. Shamloo and Mr. Ladd formed Ginnytex, which was to be incorporated in California but was not active. The parties did not complete all required formalities to conduct business under Ginnytex as a corporation. Accordingly, the corporation operated under an oral partnership agreement. The complaint further alleged that: the business purpose of Ginnytex was to manufacture yarn into fabric for resale; the conversion or manufacturing of the yarn was to be performed by third parties for which Ginnytex would pay the market rate for their services; Mr. Shamloo's own facilities could also be used for the processing of the yarn; and Mr. Shamloo would be paid for the use of such facilities according to the market rate. In addition, the complaint alleged that Mr. Ladd contributed $75,000 as a capital investment to the partnership and another $75,000 in the form of an interest free loan. Mr. Shamloo contributed, in the words of his complaint, "sweat equity," which was in the form of labor, knowledge, and expertise in the industry. Mr. Shamloo devoted approximately 50 percent of his time and energy to running the enterprise. . . . Mr. Ladd was alleged to have breached the partnership agreement by: failing to pay Mr. Shamloo his share of partnership assets; converting partnership assets; failing to pay creditors of Ginnytex . . . .

# III. Discussion 

## SUMMARY OF CONTENTIONS AND STANDARD OF REVIEW

Mr. Ladd argues the trial court erred in: (1) awarding Mr. Shamloo $41,700 in compensation for his services rendered to the enterprise, which was reduced to $27,344.96 in the amended judgment due to lack of partnership assets . . . and (4) denying interest on the balance of the loan made by Mr. Ladd to Ginnytex. . . .

## A. Mr. Shamloo's Capital Account

Mr. Ladd contends the trial court erred in awarding over $40,000 in "sweat equity" to Mr. Shamloo. As noted previously, Mr. Shamloo alleged he made a capital contribution in the form of services. Mr. Shamloo counters that the trial court's award was not based on his service. Rather, Mr. Shamloo argues the award was reimbursement for a capital contribution. Mr. Shamloo further argues that there was evidence introduced that he contributed 15 years of "know how," as well as his facilities, equipment, and the services of his staff. Based on this evidence, the trial court could reasonably value $40,000 as his equitable contribution to the enterprise.

The evidence established that the parties initially agreed to form a corporation but failed to comply with the requisite procedures to incorporate. It was undisputed that, as a result of the failure to incorporate, Ginnytex was a de facto partnership, which is governed by the applicable version of the California Uniform Partnership Act located in former section 15001 et seq. of the Corporations Code. . . . Former section 15018 , provides in part:

The rights and duties of the partners in relation to the partnership shall be determined, subject to any agreement between them, by the following rules:
(a) Each partner shall be repaid his or her contributions, whether by way of capital or advances to the partnership property and share equally in the profits and surplus remaining after all liabilities, including those to partners, are satisfied. . . .
(f) No partner is entitled to remuneration for acting in the partnership business, except that a surviving partner is entitled to reasonable compensation for his or her services in winding up the partnership affairs.

In Tiffany v. Short (1943) 22 Cal.2d 531, 139 P.2d 939, the California Supreme Court explained the manner in which partnership assets may be distributed upon dissolution as follows.


#### Abstract

The general rule applicable to dissolution in such cases is that in the absence of an express agreement to the contrary, the person advancing capital is entitled to its return before there is a division of income or profits. . . "Upon dissolution of a firm the capital remaining after payment of the debts should be divided in accordance with the respective interests of the partners. While it has been said that, in the absence of any evidence showing a contrary intent, capital will be divided equally, the general rule is that each partner is entitled to the amount of capital that he contributed, this being regarded as a debt of the firm to be repaid in whole if the firm assets are sufficient, and pro rata if firm assets are insufficient." It is further stated . . . that a partner contributing only services is ordinarily not entitled to a share of capital on dissolution. [Citations.] (Id. at pp. 533-534, 139 P.2d 939; see Kovacik v. Reed (1957) 49 Cal.2d 166, 169, 315 P.2d 314.)


Thus, the rule is that, absent an agreement, a partner is not entitled to compensation for rendering services for the partnership other than profits. A partner is only entitled to compensation where the evidence discloses an express or implied agreement that such partner will be compensated.

There is no substantial evidence that the . . . agreement between the parties contemplated, much less resolved, the issue of whether Mr. Shamloo was to be compensated upon dissolution of the partnership for his contribution of services to the enterprise in lieu of an actual capital contribution. When asked to explain his understanding of the agreement, Mr. Shamloo testified that Mr. Ladd would contribute the money. According to Mr. Shamloo, he would be contributing his expertise. Also, Mr. Shamloo would provide the facilities to support the partnership operations. Mr. Shamloo testified that the profits would be split evenly. Mr. Shamloo testified that there was an understanding that Mr. Ladd would complete the paperwork for the incorporation of Ginnytex. A similar understanding was reached in connection with the formalities for a partnership. Once the business was formed, Mr. Ladd contributed $75,000 in capital and $75,000 as a loan. Other than a $450 to $500 cash payment for what Mr. Shamloo described as a "corporation cost fee," he only contributed his "expertise in this business." Mr. Ladd testified that Mr. Shamloo's contribution of his expertise did not represent 50 percent of the enterprise's capital. Mr. Ladd categorically denied that there was ever an understanding that his expertise would be treated as a percentage of capital. As can be noted, there was no testimony that the parties agreed that Mr. Shamloo's contribution of services, expertise, and use of his plant would be treated as capital which would be compensable upon dissolution of the enterprise. Therefore, under the controlling authority of Tiffany v. Short, supra, 22 Cal. 2 d at pages 533-534, 139 P.2d 939, the $27,344.96 award to Mr. Shamloo is reversed. . . .


# D. The Interest on the $75,000 Loan to Ginnytex 

Mr. Ladd argues that the trial court failed to award any interest on the loan in the amount of $75,000 by him to Ginnytex. The evidence shows Mr. Ladd agreed to contribute $75,000 as capital. Mr. Ladd also agreed to loan $75,000 to Ginnytex. The record also shows that Mr. Ladd unilaterally withdrew $61,496.05 from a Ginnytex account. The trial court awarded Mr. Ladd $13,503.95 as the remaining balance on the loan to Ginnytex but denied his interest claim. Mr. Ladd claims he is entitled to $29,430.30, which includes interest calculated from the date of the advance.

Former section 15018, subdivision (c) provides, that subject to any agreement between the parties: "A partner, who in aid of the partnership makes any payment or advance beyond the amount of the capital which he agreed to contribute, shall be paid interest from the date of the payment or advance." This statute clearly and unequivocally states that a partner should be paid interest from the date of an advance.

Mr. Shamloo nevertheless argues that there was no evidence that the parties expressly or impliedly agreed to pay interest on the loan. Mr. Shamloo's argument is based on a number of authorities which have concluded that a partner is not entitled to interest on capital contributions. However a distinction must be made between interest payable on a loan or advance from the interest payable on a capital contribution. An advance is not a capital contribution but is treated as a loan or obligation to the partnership requiring the payment of interest. Pursuant to former section 15018, subdivision (c), interest is payable on an advance unless there is a contrary agreement.

By contrast, former section 15018, subdivision (d) provides: "A partner shall receive interest on the capital contributed by him only from the date when repayment should be made." Accordingly, interest is not due on a capital contribution unless the parties agree otherwise or until payment of the capital is due. Mr. Ladd did not request interest on his capital contribution nor would he have been entitled to interest in the absence of an agreement.

While Mr. Ladd is not entitled to interest on his capital contribution, he is entitled to interest on the loan unless the evidence establishes the parties agreed to the contrary. No evidence was introduced that the parties agreed not to pay Mr. Ladd interest on the loan to Ginnytex. Accordingly, he is entitled to interest on the loan from the date of the advance. . . .

# NOTES AND QUESTIONS 

1. Is the reasoning in the two principal cases sound? The policy rational? What are the incentive effects? Would it have made more sense to decide Kovacik v. Reed by terming the relationship as one between a sole proprietor and an independent contractor?
2. Reconsider Notes 1-4, page 79. Could it be argued that the relationship between Kovacik and Reed was not a joint venture because the parties had no express or implied agreement to share losses? Consider the implications of the following analysis: "a duty to share in losses actually and impliedly exists as a matter of law in a situation where one party supplies the labor, experience and skill, and the other the necessary capital since in the event of a loss, the party supplying the knowhow would have exercised his skill in vain and the party supplying the capital investment would have suffered a diminishment thereof." Florida Tomato Packers, Inc. v. Wilson, 296 So. 2d 536, 539 (Fla. 3d Dist. Ct. App. 1974).
3. For a case explicitly following Kovacik v. Reed, see Kessler v. Antinora, 653 A.2d 579 (N.J. Super. Ct. App. Div. 1995).
# PROBLEM 2-3 

Full-Time, Part-Time, and None agreed to own and operate a coffee shop. None contributed $50,000 in cash; Part-Time contributed $25,000 in cash and the use of the premises on which the coffee shop was to be operated. Full-Time made no contribution of money, but agreed to and did devote her full time and efforts in managing the coffee shop. Part-Time served as the bookkeeper for the business, devoting approximately ten hours per week to this task. None provided no services to the venture, other than occasionally discussing the status of the business with Part-Time and Full-Time. The coffee shop operated for six months but was forced to close when the owner of the property terminated Part-Time's lease. Rather than find a new location, the venturers decided to settle accounts and go their separate ways. After reducing the firm's assets to cash, Part-Time was able to pay off all claims by third parties. At no time was any money withdrawn from the business by None, Part-Time, or FullTime, either as compensation for services, as a loan, or as a share of profits. What are None's, Part-Time's, and Full-Time's rights and obligations if the residual cash totals:
(a) $0 ?
(b) $75,000 ?
(c) $100,000 ?

## PROBLEM 2-4

Reconsider the facts in Problem 2-3. What are None's, Part-Time's, and FullTime's rights and obligations if, after reducing the firm's assets to cash, the claims of third parties exceed the available cash by $90,000 ?


[^0]: 1. The record is silent as to the factors taken into account by the referee in determining the "loss" suffered by the venture. However, there is no contention that defendant's services were ascribed any value whatsoever. It may also be noted that the trial court "found" that "neither plaintiff nor defendant was to receive compensation for their services rendered to said joint venture, but plaintiff and defendant were to share equally all their joint venture profits and losses between them." Neither party suggests that plaintiff actually rendered services to the venture in the same sense that defendant did. And, as is clear from the settled statement, plaintiff's proposition to defendant was that plaintiff would provide the money as against defendant's contribution of services as estimator and superintendent.