
With this background, we return to the legal regime that governs the exercise of director decision-making. Recall that the business judgment rule offers directors broad discretion; however, director discretion is not unlimited. The cases that follow set forth the limits of director discretion embodied in the business judgment rule.
# a. Discretion to Determine Business Goals, Strategies, and Policies 

What are the limits of the business judgment rule's presumption that directors are acting in the best interests of the corporation and its shareholders in determining fundamental business goals, strategies, and policies? What must a shareholder plead or prove to overcome this presumption?

Suppose, for example, that a corporation is consistently underperforming other corporations engaged in similar business activities. Suppose, further, that the pleadings in a minority shareholder's suit suggest that a plausible explanation for the corporation's underperformance is the corporation's continued pursuit of idiosyncratic business practices-practices that have been abandoned or eschewed by competitor firms. To what extent should dissatisfied shareholders be able to obtain a trial seeking to hold the directors liable for approving the challenged business practices? Does or should it matter whether a majority of the corporation's shareholders support the corporation's business plan?

## Shlensky v. Wrigley <br> Appellate Court of Illinois, 1968 237 N.E.2d 776

Sullivan, Justice.
This is an appeal from a dismissal of plaintiff's amended complaint on motion of the defendants. The action was a stockholders' derivative suit against the directors for negligence and mismanagement. The corporation was also made a defendant. Plaintiff sought damages and an order that defendants cause the installation of lights in Wrigley Field and the scheduling of night baseball games.

Plaintiff is a minority stockholder of defendant corporation, Chicago National League Ball Club (Inc.), a Delaware corporation with its principal place of business in Chicago, Illinois. Defendant corporation owns and operates the major league professional baseball team known as the Chicago Cubs. The corporation also engages in the operation of Wrigley Field, the Cubs' home park, the concessionaire sales during Cubs' home games, television and radio broadcasts of Cubs' home games, the leasing of the field for football games and other events and receives its share, as visiting team, of admission moneys from games played in other National League stadia. The individual defendants are directors of the Cubs and have served for varying periods of years. Defendant Philip K. Wrigley is also president of the corporation and owner of approximately 80% of the stock therein.

Plaintiff alleges that since night baseball was first played in 1935 nineteen of the twenty major league teams have scheduled night games. In 1966, out of a total of 1620 games in the major leagues, 932 were played at night. Plaintiff alleges that every member of the major leagues, other than the Cubs, scheduled substantially all of its home games in 1966 at night, exclusive of opening days, Saturdays, Sundays, holidays and days prohibited by league rules. Allegedly this has been done for the specific purpose of maximizing attendance and thereby maximizing revenue and income.
The Cubs, in the years 1961-65, sustained operating losses from its direct baseball operations. Plaintiff attributes those losses to inadequate attendance at Cubs' home games. He concludes that if the directors continue to refuse to install lights at Wrigley Field and schedule night baseball games, the Cubs will continue to sustain comparable losses and its financial condition will continue to deteriorate.

Plaintiff alleges that, except for the year 1963, attendance at Cubs' home games has been substantially below that at their road games, many of which were played at night.

Plaintiff compares attendance at Cubs' games with that of the Chicago White Sox, an American League club, whose weekday games were generally played at night. The weekend attendance figures for the two teams was similar; however, the White Sox week-night games drew many more patrons than did the Cubs' weekday games.

Plaintiff alleges that the funds for the installation of lights can be readily obtained through financing and the cost of installation would be far more than offset and recaptured by increased revenues and incomes resulting from the increased attendance.

Plaintiff further alleges that defendant Wrigley has refused to install lights, not because of interest in the welfare of the corporation but because of his personal opinions "that baseball is a 'daytime sport' and that the installation of lights and night baseball games will have a deteriorating effect upon the surrounding neighborhood." It is alleged that he has admitted that he is not interested in whether the Cubs would benefit financially from such action because of his concern for the neighborhood, and that he would be willing for the team to play night games if a new stadium were built in Chicago.

Plaintiff alleges that the other defendant directors, with full knowledge of the foregoing matters, have acquiesced in the policy laid down by Wrigley and have permitted him to dominate the board of directors in matters involving the installation of lights and scheduling of night games, even though they knew he was not motivated by a good faith concern as to the best interests of defendant corporation, but solely by his personal views set forth above. It is charged that the directors are acting for a reason or reasons contrary and wholly unrelated to the business interests of the corporation; that such arbitrary and capricious acts constitute mismanagement and waste of corporate assets, and that the directors have been negligent in failing to exercise reasonable care and prudence in the management of the corporate affairs.

The question on appeal is whether plaintiff's amended complaint states a cause of action. It is plaintiff's position that fraud, illegality and conflict of interest are not the only bases for a stockholder's derivative action against the directors. Contrariwise, defendants argue that the courts will not step in and interfere with honest business judgment of the directors unless there is a showing of fraud, illegality or conflict of interest.

The cases in this area are numerous and each differs from the others on a factual basis. However, the courts have pronounced certain ground rules which appear in all cases and which are then applied to the given factual situation. The court in Wheeler v. Pullman Iron and Steel Company, 143 Ill. 197, 207, 32 N.E. 420, 423, said:

It is, however, fundamental in the law of corporations, that the majority of its stockholders shall control the policy of the corporation, and regulate and govern the lawful exercise of its franchise and business. . . . Every one purchasing or subscribing for stock in a corporation impliedly agrees that he will be bound by the acts and proceedings done or sanctioned by a majority of the shareholders, or by the agents of the corporation duly chosen by such majority, within the scope of the powers conferred by the charter, and courts of equity will not undertake to control the policy or business methods of a corporation, although it may be seen that a wiser policy might be adopted and the business more successful if other methods were pursued. The majority of shares of its stock, or the agents by the holders thereof lawfully chosen, must be permitted to control the business of the corporation in their discretion, when not in violation of its charter or some public law, or corruptly and fraudulently subversive of the rights and interests of the corporation or of a shareholder.

The standards set in Delaware are also clearly stated in the cases. In Davis v. Louisville Gas \& Electric Co., 16 Del. Ch. 157, 142 A. 654, a minority shareholder sought to have the directors enjoined from amending the certificate of incorporation. The court said on page 659 :

We have then a conflict in view between the responsible managers of a corporation and an overwhelming majority of its stockholders on the one hand and a dissenting minority on the other-a conflict touching matters of business policy, such as has occasioned innumerable applications to courts to intervene and determine which of the two conflicting views should prevail. The response which courts make to such applications is that it is not their function to resolve for corporations questions of policy and business management. The directors are chosen to pass upon such questions and their judgment unless shown to be tainted with fraud is accepted as final. The judgment of the directors of corporations enjoys the benefit of a presumption that it was formed in good faith and was designed to promote the best interests of the corporation they serve. (Emphasis supplied.) . . .

Plaintiff in the instant case argues that the directors are acting for reasons unrelated to the financial interest and welfare of the Cubs. However, we are not satisfied that the motives assigned to Philip K. Wrigley, and through him to the other directors, are contrary to the best interests of the corporation and the stockholders. For example, it appears to us that the effect on the surrounding neighborhood might well be considered by a director who was considering the patrons who would or would not attend the games if the park were in a poor neighborhood. Furthermore, the long run interest of the corporation in its property value at Wrigley Field might demand all efforts to keep the neighborhood from deteriorating. By these thoughts we do not mean to say that we have decided that the decision of the directors was a correct one. That is beyond our jurisdiction and ability. We are merely saying that the decision is one properly before directors and the motives alleged in the amended complaint showed no fraud, illegality or conflict of interest in their making of that decision.

While all the courts do not insist that one or more of the three elements must be present for a stockholder's derivative action to lie, nevertheless we feel that unless the conduct of the defendants at least borders on one of the elements, the courts should not interfere. The trial court in the instant case acted properly in dismissing plaintiff's amended complaint.

We feel that plaintiff's amended complaint was also defective in failing to allege damage to the corporation. The well pleaded facts must be taken as true for the purpose of judging the sufficiency of the amended complaint. However, one need not accept conclusions drawn by the pleader. Furthermore, pleadings will be construed most strongly against the pleader prior to a verdict or judgment on the merits.
There is no allegation that the night games played by the other nineteen teams enhanced their financial position or that the profits, if any, of those teams were directly related to the number of night games scheduled. There is an allegation that the installation of lights and scheduling of night games in Wrigley Field would have resulted in large amounts of additional revenues and incomes from increased attendance and related sources of income. Further, the cost of installation of lights, funds for which are allegedly readily available by financing, would be more than offset and recaptured by increased revenues. However, no allegation is made that there will be a net benefit to the corporation from such action, considering all increased costs.

Plaintiff claims that the losses of defendant corporation are due to poor attendance at home games. However, it appears from the amended complaint, taken as a whole, that factors other than attendance affect the net earnings or losses. For example, in 1962, attendance at home and road games decreased appreciably as compared with 1961, and yet the loss from direct baseball operation and of the whole corporation was considerably less.

The record shows that plaintiff did not feel he could allege that the increased revenues would be sufficient to cure the corporate deficit. The only cost plaintiff was at all concerned with was that of installation of lights. No mention was made of operation and maintenance of the lights or other possible increases in operating costs of night games and we cannot speculate as to what other factors might influence the increase or decrease of profits if the Cubs were to play night home games. . . .

Finally, we do not agree with plaintiff's contention that failure to follow the example of the other major league clubs in scheduling night games constituted negligence. Plaintiff made no allegation that these teams' night schedules were profitable or that the purpose for which night baseball had been undertaken was fulfilled. Furthermore, it cannot be said that directors, even those of corporations that are losing money, must follow the lead of the other corporations in the field. Directors are elected for their business capabilities and judgment and the courts cannot require them to forego their judgment because of the decisions of directors of other companies. Courts may not decide these questions in the absence of a clear showing of dereliction of duty on the part of the specific directors and mere failure to "follow the crowd" is not such a dereliction.

For the foregoing reasons the order of dismissal entered by the trial court is affirmed.

Affirmed.
Dempsey, P.J., and Schwartz, J., concur.

# b. Discretion to Consider Interests of Non-Shareholder Constituencies 

As the case below established, there is an outer limit to the business judgment rule's protection when shareholders claim that the directors are impermissibly favoring the interests of non-shareholder constituents. But this limit received little judicial, legislative, or scholarly attention until the 1980s when "unfriendly" takeovers sparked litigation in which directors sought to justify their defensive actions as designed to protect the interests of employees, communities, or bondholders. The courts of Delaware restated the conventional view. Directors may consider the interests of other constituencies if there is "some rationally related benefit accruing to the stockholders," Revlon, Inc. v. MacAndrews \& Forbes Holdings, Inc., 506 A.2d 173, 176 (Del. 1986), or if so doing "bears some reasonable relation to general shareholder interests," Mills Acquisition Co. v. Macmillan, Inc., 559 A.2d 1261, 1282 (Del. 1989).

The following case is a classic, generally cited and understood to stand for the proposition that directors' prime obligation is to maximize shareholder wealth. At the same time, the case stands as a stark reminder of the extent of both director power and judicial deference to director decision-making. Do the traditional justifications for the business judgment rule explain the judicial and legislative willingness to allow directors such broad authority and discretion over corporate resources and decisions?

# Dodge v. Ford Motor Co. <br> Supreme Court of Michigan, 1919 <br> 170 N.W. 668 

Ostrander, Chief Justice.
[Plaintiffs, the Dodge brothers, who later left their name on a competing line of automobiles, were two of a small number of minority investors in the young Ford Motor Company; Henry Ford himself owned 58 percent of the company's stock and dominated the company. Plaintiffs challenged the company's actions in refusing to pay dividends while expanding the company's facilities and lowering the price of its cars. A lower court enjoined planned expansion of the company's facilities and ordered the company to pay a dividend in the amount of $19,275,385.96.]

To develop the points now discussed, and to a considerable extent they may be developed together as a single point, it is necessary to refer with some particularity to the facts.

When plaintiffs made their complaint and demand for further dividends, the Ford Motor Company had concluded its most prosperous year of business. The demand for its cars at the price of the preceding year continued. . . . It could make and could market in the year beginning August 1, 1916, more than 500,000 cars. Sales of parts and repairs would necessarily increase. The cost of materials was likely to advance, and perhaps the price of labor; but it reasonably might have expected a profit for the year of upwards of $60,000,000. It had assets of more than $132,000,000, a surplus of almost $112,000,000, and its cash on hand and municipal bonds were nearly $54,000,000. Its total liabilities, including capital stock, was [sic] a little over $20,000,000. It had declared no special dividend during the business year except the October, 1915, dividend. It had been the practice, under similar circumstances, to declare larger dividends. Considering only these facts, a refusal to declare and pay further dividends appears to be not an exercise of discretion on the part of the directors, but an arbitrary refusal to do what the circumstances required to be done. These facts and others call upon the directors to justify their action, or failure or refusal to act. In justification, the defendants have offered testimony tending to prove, and which does prove, the following facts:
It had been the policy of the corporation for a considerable time to annually reduce the selling price of cars, while keeping up, or improving, their quality. As early as in June, 1915, a general plan for the expansion of the productive capacity of the concern by a practical duplication of its plant had been talked over by the executive officers and directors and agreed upon; not all of the details having been settled, and no formal action of directors having been taken. The erection of a smelter was considered, and engineering and other data in connection therewith secured. In consequence, it was determined not to reduce the selling price of cars for the year beginning August 1, 1915, but to maintain the price and to accumulate a large surplus to pay for the proposed expansion of plant and equipment, and perhaps to build a plant for smelting ore. It is hoped, by Mr. Ford, that eventually 1,000,000 cars will be annually produced. The contemplated changes will permit the increased output.

The plan, as affecting the profits of the business for the year beginning August 1, 1916, and thereafter, calls for a reduction in the selling price of the cars. It is true that this price might be at any time increased, but the plan called for the reduction in price of $80 a car. The capacity of the plant, without the additions thereto voted to be made (without a part of them at least), would produce more than 600,000 cars annually. This number, and more, could have been sold for $440 instead of $360, a difference in the return for capital, labor, and materials employed of at least $48,000,000. In short, the plan does not call for and is not intended to produce immediately a more profitable business, but a less profitable one; not only less profitable than formerly, but less profitable than it is admitted it might be made. The apparent immediate effect will be to diminish the value of shares and the returns to shareholders.

It is the contention of plaintiffs that the apparent effect of the plan is intended to be the continued and continuing effect of it and that it is deliberately proposed, not of record and not by official corporate declaration, but nevertheless proposed, to continue the corporation henceforth as a semi-eleemosynary institution and not as a business institution. In support of this contention they point to the attitude and to the expressions of Mr. Henry Ford[,] . . . the dominant force in the business of the Ford Motor Company. . . . A business, one of the largest in the world, and one of the most profitable, has been built up. It employs many men, at good pay.
"My ambition," said Mr. Ford, "is to employ still more men, to spread the benefits of this industrial system to the greatest possible number, to help them build up their lives and their homes. To do this we are putting the greatest share of our profits back in the business."
... The record, and especially the testimony of Mr. Ford, convinces that he has to some extent the attitude towards shareholders of one who has dispensed and distributed to them large gains and that they should be content to take what he chooses to give. His testimony creates the impression, also, that he thinks the Ford Motor Company has made too much money, has had too large profits, and that although large profits might be still earned, a sharing of them with the public, by reducing the price of the output of the company, ought to be undertaken. We have no doubt that certain sentiments, philanthropic and altruistic, creditable to Mr. Ford, had large influence in determining the policy to be pursued by the Ford Motor Company - the policy which has been herein referred to.
... These cases, after all, like all others in which the subject is treated, turn finally upon the point, the question, whether it appears that the directors were not acting for the best interests of the corporation. We do not draw in question, nor do counsel for the plaintiffs do so, the validity of the general propositions stated by counsel nor the soundness of the opinions delivered in the cases cited. The case presented here is not like any of them. The difference between an incidental humanitarian expenditure of corporate funds for the benefit of the employees, like the building of a hospital for their use and the employment of agencies for the betterment of their condition, and a general purpose and plan to benefit mankind at the expense of others, is obvious. There should be no confusion (of which there is evidence) of the duties which Mr. Ford conceives that he and the stockholders owe to the general public and the duties which in law he and his codirectors owe to protesting, minority stockholders. A business corporation is organized and carried on primarily for the profit of the stockholders. The powers of the directors are to be employed for that end. The discretion of directors is to be exercised in the choice of means to attain that end and does not extend to a change in the end itself, to the reduction of profits or to the nondistribution of profits among stockholders in order to devote them to other purposes.

There is committed to the discretion of directors, a discretion to be exercised in good faith, the infinite details of business, including the wages which shall be paid to employees, the number of hours they shall work, the conditions under which labor shall be carried on, and the prices for which products shall be offered to the public. It is said by appellants that the motives of the board members are not material and will not be inquired into by the court so long as their acts are within their lawful powers. As we have pointed out, and the proposition does not require argument to sustain it, it is not within the lawful powers of a board of directors to shape and conduct the affairs of a corporation for the merely incidental benefit of shareholders and for the primary purpose of benefiting others, and no one will contend that if the avowed purpose of the defendant directors was to sacrifice the interests of shareholders it would not be the duty of the courts to interfere.

We are not, however, persuaded that we should interfere with the proposed expansion of the business of the Ford Motor Company. In view of the fact that the selling price of products may be increased at any time, the ultimate results of the larger business cannot be certainly estimated. The judges are not business experts. It is recognized that plans must often be made for a long future, for expected competition, for a continuing as well as an immediately profitable venture. The experience of the Ford Motor Company is evidence of capable management of its affairs. It may be noticed, incidentally, that it took from the public the money required for the execution of its plan and that the very considerable salaries paid to Mr. Ford and to certain executive officers and employees were not diminished. We are not satisfied that the alleged motives of the directors, in so far as they are reflected in the conduct of the business, menace the interests of shareholders. It is enough to say, perhaps, that the court of equity is at all times open to complaining shareholders having a just grievance. . . .

Assuming the general plan and policy of expansion and the details of it to have been sufficiently, formally, approved at the October and November, 1917, meetings of directors, and assuming further that the plan and policy and the details agreed upon were for the best ultimate interest of the company and therefore of its shareholders, what does it amount to in justification of a refusal to declare and pay a special dividend or dividends? The Ford Motor Company was able to estimate with nicety its income and profit. It could sell more cars than it could make. Having ascertained what it would cost to produce a car and to sell it, the profit upon each car depended upon the selling price. That being fixed, the yearly income and profit was determinable, and, within slight variations, was certain.

There was appropriated - voted - for the smelter $11,325,000. As to the remainder voted, there is no available way for determining how much had been paid before the action of directors was taken and how much was paid thereafter; but assuming that the plans required an expenditure sooner or later of $9,895,000 for duplication of the plant, and for land and other expenditures $3,000,000, the total is $24,220,000. The company was continuing business, at a profit-a cash business. If the total cost of proposed expenditures had been immediately withdrawn in cash from the cash surplus (money and bonds) on hand August 1, 1916, there would have remained nearly $30,000,000.

Defendants say, and it is true, that a considerable cash balance must be at all times carried by such a concern. But, as has been stated, there was a large daily, weekly, monthly, receipt of cash. The output was practically continuous and was continuously, and within a few days, turned into cash. Moreover, the contemplated expenditures were not to be immediately made. The large sum appropriated for the smelter plant was payable over a considerable period of time. So that, without going further, it would appear that, accepting and approving the plan of the directors, it was their duty to distribute on or near the 1st of August, 1916, a very large sum of money to stockholders. . . .

The decree of the court below fixing and determining the specific amount to be distributed to stockholders is affirmed. In other respects, except as to the allowance of costs, the said decree is reversed.

# NOTES AND QUESTIONS 

1. Since the 1980s, statements in Delaware case law and by prominent judges have indicated that in Delaware, corporate directors must "make stockholder welfare their sole end, and that other interests may be taken into consideration only as a means of promoting stockholder welfare." Leo E. Strine Jr., The Dangers of Denial: The Need for a Clear-Eyed Understanding of the Power and Accountability Structure Established by the Delaware General Corporation Law, 50 Wake Forest L. Rev. 761 (2015). But the business judgment rule, as reflected in cases like Shlensky v. Wrigley and Dodge v. Ford, gives a corporation's directors considerable space in determining how to allocate the firm's resources, including discretion to operate in a socially responsible manner, even if doing so has a possible negative effect on profits (and therefore, shareholder wealth). For example, courts will not entertain a shareholder lawsuit seeking to force Costco to reduce the total compensation it provides to its workforce even if the pay and benefits package for the average Costco worker is more generous than the industry norm, so long as Costco justifies such policy as in the long-term best interest of the corporation and its shareholders. ^3 Likewise, courts will not entertain a shareholder lawsuit against Alphabet, Inc. (Google) seeking to modify or recover damages resulting from charitable giving practices substantially more generous than those of other corporations. ^4 However, this result obtains because outliers like Costco and Alphabet do not describe their policies as altruistic in nature. Rather, they justify such expenditures as being in the direct best interest of the corporation. Costco can point to the benefits of substantially higher worker productivity and morale and much lower turnover and argue that its compensation policies are less costly than the so-called Walmart model. Similarly, Alphabet can justify its substantial charitable contributions as value-maximizing in the long run, because many of the beneficiaries are engaged in research that will spur innovation essential to Alphabet's continued success.

However, some commentators have gone so far as to say that given the breadth of discretion awarded to corporate directors, any duty to maximize shareholder wealth is of little practical importance. See, e.g., Lynn Stout, The Shareholder Value Myth: How Putting Shareholders First Harms Investors, Corporations, and the Public 30-31 (2012). Dodge v. Ford and a twenty-first-century case in the Delaware Court of Chancery reveal the limit of that argument. In eBay Domestic Holdings v. Newmark, the Delaware Court of Chancery rejected the argument that the founders of Craigslist could prioritize the online community over the remaining shareholders, stating that the court "cannot accept as valid . . . a corporate policy that specifically, clearly, and admittedly seeks not to maximize the economic value of a for-profit corporation for the benefit of its stockholders." 16 A.3d 1, 35 (Del. Ch. 2010).
2. Compare the current debate with the legislative initiatives in the 1980s to increase managers' discretion in certain circumstances. More than 30 states adopted other-constituency statutes that explicitly gave corporate management discretion to put stakeholder welfare on equal footing to shareholder wealth. Most of these statutes provide that in determining the best interest of the corporation, directors may consider the interests of suppliers, employees, customers, and affected communities. These statutes do not necessarily require a change in the traditional interpretation of 4. In 2012 Google, Inc. led all other American corporations in generosity, donating $144,606,000 ( 9.6 percent of its profits) to charity. Nader Salass, Big Businesses That Donated Most Cash: Chronicle of Philanthropy, Huffington Post (July 16, 2013).
fiduciary duty (as evidenced by their use of the permissive verb "may" rather than the mandatory "shall"). While the impetus for these statutes was clearly to assist anti-takeover efforts of local firms, only a handful of other-constituency provisions are expressly limited to the takeover context.

The ABA Committee on Corporate Laws, however, considered and soundly rejected any amendment of MBCA ยง8.30 to include other constituencies. (Delaware as well did not adopt an other-constituency statute.) In reporting its decision, the committee expressed concern about the possible implications of the new statutes:

The proponents of other constituencies statutes correctly recognize that many groups in addition to shareholders have a continuing and important economic stake in the welfare of corporations with which they have relationships. Often the shareholder's interest in the corporation is transitory, frequently a matter of days or weeks, while that of a manager or other employee may embrace a career and that of a community far longer. Similarly, a supplier may be almost wholly dependent upon one corporate customer for its economic viability, and a corporate customer may also have a measure of dependence upon its supplier. A community and its desirability as a corporate home and a residence for its citizens may depend upon one or a handful of corporations. . . .

The issue then becomes whether state corporation laws, and, in particular, a broadening of the interests that directors may consider, constitute an efficient and desirable way to provide protections for non-shareholder groups. The Committee has concluded that permitting-much less requiring-directors to consider these interests without relating such consideration in an appropriate fashion to shareholder welfare (as the Delaware courts have done) would conflict with directors' responsibility to shareholders and could undermine the effectiveness of the system that has made the corporation an efficient device for the creation of jobs and wealth.

The Committee believes that the better interpretation of these statutes, and one that avoids such consequences, is that they confirm what the common law has been: directors may take into account the interests of other constituencies but only as and to the extent that the directors are acting in the best interests, long as well as short term, of the shareholders and the corporation. While the Delaware courts have related the consideration directors may give other constituencies to the interests of shareholders by stating there must be "rationally related benefits to shareholders, it may well be that other courts may choose other words with which to express the nexus.

ABA Comm. on Corp. Laws, Other Constituency Statutes: Potential for Confusion, 45 Bus. Law. 2253, 2268 (1990).
3. Both the hopes and fears surrounding the adoption of other-constituency statutes proved unfounded. As the twentieth century came to a close, the following commentator expressed the dominant view.

Proponents of constituency statutes would better serve the interests they seek to advance by focusing on other measures. Constituency statutes arguably detract attention from more promising measures of change such as measures with potential to change not only whose interests may be legally considered, but who also makes corporate decisions.

Constituency statutes are red herrings. . . [T]he fact that these statutes are invoked by directors casually, perhaps sometimes even cynically, does little to advance the case for consideration of constituent interests in corporate law. On some level, constituency statutes may be seen to detract attention from the need for changes in corporate law that will more effectively address the needs and rights, of employees and other constituent groups.

Jonathan D. Springer, 1999 Ann. Surv. Am. L. 85, 123 (1999).
Could the benefit corporation, discussed in the next section, be seen as responsive to such commentary?
# PROBLEM 4-2 

Sportswear, Inc. is engaged in the sports clothing and shoe business. Most of its manufacturing plants are located in underdeveloped countries. For over a year, civil and human rights groups have been assailing Sportswear for taking advantage of its foreign workers. Responding to this criticism, Sportswear's board of directors investigated its overseas operations and concluded that all of its plants were operating in compliance with local laws relating to wages, health, and safety. Despite this finding, the board has decided to invest $100 million during the coming year to bring all overseas plants into compliance with American health and safety standards, and, at an annually recurring cost of approximately $200 million, to increase the wages of all overseas personnel to at least the U.S. minimum wage. During the press conference announcing these decisions, a Sportswear spokesperson stated that the board of directors expected that these expenditures, over both the short and long term, would have a significant negative impact on earnings.

A Sportswear shareholder has filed a derivative suit seeking to protect the corporation from the consequences of the board's announced plans. Is the board's action protected by the business judgment rule?

## McRitchie v. Zuckerberg <br> Delaware Court of Chancery, 2024 315 A.3d 518

## Laster, V.C.

Under the standard Delaware formulation, directors owe fiduciary duties to the corporation and its stockholders. Implicitly, the "stockholders" are the stockholders of the specific corporation that the directors serve, i.e., "its" stockholders. The standard Delaware formulation thus contemplates a single-firm model (or firm-specific model) in which directors of a corporation owe duties to the stockholders as investors in that corporation. That point is so basic that no Delaware decisions have felt the need to say it. Fish don't talk about water.

The plaintiff takes a different view. Capitalizing on the word "stockholders," the plaintiff observes that stockholders are investors. The plaintiff then argues that under Modern Portfolio Theory, prudent investors diversify. Therefore, says the plaintiff, the law must operate on the assumption that a corporation's stockholders are diversified. The plaintiff concludes that owing fiduciary duties to the corporation and its stockholders must mean owing duties that run to the corporation and its stockholders as diversified equity investors. Furthermore, according to the plaintiff, because the returns that accrue to diversified equity investors should generally track the economy as a whole, complying with fiduciary duties oriented to diversified equity investors must mean managing the corporation based on what would be best for the economy as a whole.

The plaintiff contends that Delaware law currently follows a diversified-investor model. If not, then the plaintiff argues that Delaware law should change. To ameliorate the significance of reorienting Delaware law, the plaintiff proposes a pilot program in which the diversified-investor model applies to systemically significant corporations whose operations have an outsized effect on the economy.

The plaintiff points to Meta Platforms, Inc. ("Meta" or the "Company") as the poster child for a systemically significant firm. The plaintiff has sued the directors, officers, and controller of Meta, claiming that they all breached their duties by managing Meta under a firm-specific model rather than a diversified-investor model. The complaint describes a litany of ways in which Meta's fiduciaries have allegedly managed the corporation to generate firm-specific value at the expense of the economy as a whole. The complaint also points to the concentrated positions that Meta's directors, officers, and controller own in its equity. The plaintiff contends that those holdings create a conflict of interest for those fiduciaries, meaning that the defendants must prove that their decisions were entirely fair.

The defendants have moved to dismiss the complaint for failing to state a claim on which relief can be granted. They acknowledge that they manage Meta under a firm-specific model. As their defense, they maintain that that is what Delaware law requires.

This decision grants the defendants' motion. The "deep architecture" of Delaware corporate law reveals that directors owe firm-specific fiduciary duties. Numerous Delaware Supreme Court authorities rest on that implicit proposition. So does American corporate law generally, which has taken a firm-specific approach since courts first treated directors as fiduciaries during the first half of the nineteenth century.

The plaintiff has not made a persuasive case for change. At most, he has shown that some academics - primarily from the law and economics school - have assumed that a diversified-investor model is the norm. He has also shown that some investor advocacy organizations would prefer that model.

The plaintiff's principal argument rests on policy. According to the plaintiff, the single-firm model creates pathologies because directors can take actions that are val-ue-promoting for the individual firm but that harm the economy as a whole. In short, the plaintiff has rediscovered the concept of externalities. The classic example is pollution. If a firm can generate profits using a process that creates pollution, and if there is no legal mechanism to force the firm to internalize the costs of the pollution, then the firm can profit by polluting.

The plaintiff believes that under a diversified-investor model, the outcome would be different. Directors would conclude that because they owe duties to diversified investors, they must consider the effect of their decisions on the economy as a whole. Because externality-creating activities harm the economy as a whole, directors would have a fiduciary obligation not to pursue them. Not only that, but because directors who own concentrated positions in their firm's stock face a conflict of interest between the interests of firm-specific investors and those of diversified investors, stockholder plaintiffs could challenge decisions that inferably created firm-specific benefits at the expense of the economy. Directors could eliminate that conflict by holding diversified portfolios of shares, at which point their decisions would receive the protection of the business judgment rule. But if the directors held concentrated positions, stockholders could sue, entire fairness would apply, and courts would have to adjudicate whether the directors could prove that their actions did not harm the economy as a whole.
There are reasons to be skeptical. The academic literature indicates that a diversified-investor model has drawbacks of its own, and the case for imposing a different fiduciary model is far from clear.

Still, there is a way to achieve the plaintiff's desired result. Delaware's governance model is flexible enough to accommodate corporations where directors pursue the interests of diversified investors. The Delaware General Corporation Law (the "DGCL") authorizes private ordering and empowers corporate planners to tailor director duties through provisions in the certificate of incorporation. Using that authority, corporate planners who find the plaintiff's arguments convincing can reorient director duties toward diversified stockholders.

In the face of Delaware Supreme Court precedent that rests implicitly on the single-firm model, it is not reasonably conceivable that Delaware corporate law currently operates on a diversified-investor model. Nor does this court have the freedom to adopt it, even assuming the concept was sound. The complaint is therefore dismissed.

# I. Factual Background . . . 

## A. META'S BUSINESS

Meta is the largest social media network in the world. It has four major social media platforms: Facebook, Instagram, Messenger, and WhatsApp. Approximately 3.59 billion people use those platforms every month, and 2.82 billion people use them every day. Those figures represent, respectively, 43% and 35% of the world's population. Users send over 140 billion messages daily on Meta's platforms.

Meta's ubiquity allows the firm to generate spectacular topline revenues and bottom-line profit. In 2021, Meta generated $118 billion in revenue and $39.3 billion in profit. Advertising generates substantially all of Meta's revenues. Meta's ability to sell ads depends on user engagement with its platforms. Higher engagement levels result in users viewing more advertisements and generating more revenue for Meta. For Meta management, engagement is a key metric.

## B. META'S FIDUCIARIES

Meta is a Delaware corporation with two classes of stock. Class A shares trade publicly and carry one vote per share. Class B shares are only held by insiders and carry ten votes per share.

Meta has a nine-member board of directors (the "Board"). The directors are Mark Zuckerberg, Robert Kimmitt, Peggy Alford, Marc Andreessen, Andrew Houston, Nancy Killefer, Sheryl Sandberg, Tracy Travis, and Tony Xu.

Zuckerberg founded Meta and serves as its CEO. Zuckerberg owns shares of Meta common stock worth approximately $67.6 billion. His holdings include 350 million shares of Class B stock. Although his shares comprise only 13.6% of the outstanding equity, they enable Zuckerberg to exercise hard majority control over Meta. . . .
# C. META'S DIVERSIFIED INVESTORS 

Meta's public stockholders are broadly diversified institutional investors. As of June 2023, institutional investors owned 75% of Meta's publicly traded Class A common stock, with the top five institutional holders owning 28%. Many of the institutions are legally required to diversify.

Diversification comports with Modern Portfolio Theory. Its proponents have demonstrated through mathematical models that investors can increase returns at lower risk by owning a diversified portfolio of securities. For diversified investors, returns primarily track overall market performance, not the performance of individual companies. Over time, market performance should rise and fall with the performance of the economy as a whole. Assuming gross domestic product ("GDP") is a representative measure of the performance of the economy as a whole, a diversified portfolio should rise and fall over time with GDP.

## D. THE DIVERGENCE BETWEEN CONCENTRATED INVESTORS AND DIVERSIFIED INVESTORS

[T]he plaintiff contends that Zuckerberg, Sandberg, and the other Meta directors are concentrated investors, meaning that they benefit when Meta outperforms the market. The plaintiff alleges that Meta's other stockholders are diversified investors who benefit when the market as a whole does well.

The plaintiff observes that the interests of concentrated investors and diversified investors can diverge when a company's business generates negative externalities. An externality is simply an effect or consequence of an activity that is not reflected in the cost of the activity. The existence of externalities means that the person engaging in the activity does not fully internalize all of its effects or consequences.

Externalities can be positive or negative. A positive externality confers benefits on third parties, meaning that the person engaging in the activity does not internalize all of the benefits. A company's research and development efforts create positive externalities when the company invents new products that increase the wider level of knowledge in society. Other companies and individuals benefit from the increased knowledge base without having to compensate the inventor. A person who does not internalize all of the benefits of an activity is likely to engage in less of it than is socially desirable. The law can step in with measures designed to address the externality. For research and development efforts, patent rights seek to protect the inventor's discovery so that the inventor will internalize more of the benefits and will be incentivized to do more inventing.

A negative externality does the opposite. It harms third parties, meaning that the person engaging in the activity does not internalize all of the costs and, all else equal, will engage in more of the activity than is socially desirable. A classic example is pollution. The law can step in with measures designed to address the externality, such as through regulation to prohibit the activity, a Pigouvian tax to account for its cost, or subsidies for competing activities that do not generate the externality.

Because a business that generates negative externalities does not internalize their cost, the owners of that business benefit from continuing to create them. Consider a factory that generates a negative externality in the form of pollution. Assume the factory can use a cheaper manufacturing process that generates more pollution or a costlier manufacturing process that generates less pollution. By using the cheaper process, the factory increases its profits. The owners of the factory receive all of the benefits of the increased profits. If the costs of the increased pollution are spread across the surrounding community, the owners may only feel the effects of the pollution to a small extent. The owners have socialized one dimension of the costs of their business, while keeping all of the gains.

The plaintiff contends that Meta's business generates negative externalities. They cite various news reports that followed a whistleblower's disclosure of a cache of internal Meta documents. The articles included a series called The Facebook Files that the The Wall Street Journal published in September 2021. The plaintiff contends that Zuckerberg has used his control to ensure that Meta maximizes user engagement, which drives Meta's profits, at the expense of user safety.

One article reported that Meta's internal analyses showed that Instagram use correlated with teenage mental health issues. Internal reports noted that increased Instagram use made body image issues worse for one in three teenage girls. Meta decided not to take action because expanding its base of young users was vital to the Company's revenue. More than 40% of Instagram's users were 22 years old and younger, and about 22 million teenagers logged onto Instagram in the U.S. each day, compared with five million teenagers logging into Facebook, where its base of young users had been shrinking for a decade. . . .

The plaintiff contends that Meta consciously and openly prioritizes companyspecific value over harm to the economy and society. Meta's Corporate Governance Guidelines discuss the goal of "enhancing long-term value for Meta shareholders" without discussing the effects of the Company's operations on diversified stockholder portfolios. The Company's risk management strategy focuses on community safety, human rights, and similar concerns, but only if they pose risks to the Company itself. The plaintiff complains that the Board has not established any mandate to monitor or mitigate risks that the Company's operations pose to the economy or diversified stockholders. There are also no parameters for balancing risks that are minor to the Company but material to Meta's diversified stockholders.

The plaintiff also points to Meta's compensation programs, which focus solely on the Company's financial performance, rather than portfolio-based returns to diversified stockholders. The Board provides executives with large grants of equity, which incentivize executives to pursue initiatives that promote Meta's value at the expense of the economy, society, and the portfolios of diversified stockholders.

Finally, the plaintiff points out that at Meta's 2022 annual meeting, the Board opposed four stockholder proposals that focused on the types of harms that negatively impact diversified investment portfolios. One proposal asked the Board to commission and disclose a report on (1) risks created by Company business practices that prioritize internal financial return over healthy social and environmental systems and (2) the manner in which such risks threaten the returns of its diversified shareholders who rely on a productive economy to support their investment portfolios. Another asked Meta to investigate the risks and negative impacts that the Metaverse could cause. A third addressed mental health issues. A fourth sought a report on the effects of Meta's advertising policies and practices.
In opposing the proposals, the Board cited expenditures the Company had made to address those concerns, but the plaintiff observes that the funds deployed for stock buybacks dwarfed those expenditures. For example, the Board highlighted safety expenditures of $5 billion, yet during 2021, the Company had spent $44 billion on stock buybacks. . . .

# II. Legal Analysis 

The defendants have moved for dismissal under Rule 12(b) (6). . . .
In this case, the plaintiff's arguments rise or fall on the standard of conduct. The plaintiff contends that Meta's directors owe fiduciary duties to stockholders in their capacities as diversified investors. The complaint alleges facts demonstrating that Meta's directors have sought to promote the value of the corporation for the benefit of the corporation's stockholders as holders of stock in Meta, not as diversified investors. The complaint alleges facts demonstrating that Meta's directors hold concentrated positions in Meta's common stock such that, if common stock ownership could create a conflict, then Meta's directors would have to show that their decisions were entirely fair. Thus, if the plaintiff is correct that Meta's directors must manage the business and affairs of the corporation for the benefit of diversified investors, not firm-specific investors, then the plaintiff has stated a claim on which relief can be granted. If, by contrast, Meta's directors must manage the business and affairs of the corporation for the benefit of firm-specific investors, not diversified investors, then the claim dissolves.

## A. DELAWARE FOLLOWS A SINGLE-FIRM MODEL

Delaware corporate law starts from the bedrock principle that " [t] he business and affairs of every corporation . . . shall be managed by or under the direction of a board of directors. ^21 That statutory grant of authority forms the foundation of Delaware's board-centric model of governance. The board's possession of nigh-plenary authority under Section 141 (a) "carries with it certain fundamental fiduciary obligations to the corporation and its shareholders." Thus, in the standard Delaware formulation, the directors' fiduciary duties run to the corporation and its stockholders. The "its" refers to the stockholders of that corporation-a single-firm model.

## 1. The Word "Stockholders" and Four Inapposite Cases Do Not Support a Diversified-Investor Model

The plaintiff hitches its wagon to the word "stockholders." The plaintiff points out that stockholders are investors, then observes that "[s]mart investors diversify." Therefore, says the plaintiff, managing a corporation for the ultimate benefit of its stockholders must mean managing it for the benefit of diversified investors. The plaintiff next argues that "[f]or a diversified Meta stockholder, the critical factor determining financial return will not be how Meta or any other individual company performs ('alpha'), but rather how the market performs as a whole ('beta')." The plaintiff asserts that over time, a diversified investor's portfolio will track the returns from the market as a whole. Not only that, but market returns will generally track the performance of the economy itself. "While valuation multiples rise and fall, they revert to a mean, leaving GDP as the key determinant of diversified portfolio value."

Other than a gloss on the word "stockholders," the plaintiff offers scant support for this radical claim. The plaintiff cites only three Delaware cases. One is . . . Theodora Holding Corp. v. Henderson, where this court held that a corporation could make a charitable contribution because the directors rationally believed that it would promote the value of the firm for the benefit of the corporation and its stockholders. That case confirms that fiduciary duties run to the corporation for the benefit of its firm-specific stockholders. It does not support a diversified-investor model.
[There] is remarkably little law to support the assertion that Delaware law already follows a diversified-investor model. At the same time, the lack of law is not surprising, because Delaware law does not follow a diversified-investor model. . . .

# B. THE PLAINTIFF'S ARGUMENT FOR CHANGING THE LAW 

This decision has shown that Delaware law does not currently follow a diversified-investor approach. Undaunted, the plaintiff argues that Delaware law should change. That argument has no chance in this court, given the existence of binding Delaware Supreme Court opinions that rest on the single-firm model. The plaintiff's argument is also unpersuasive in its own right.

## 1. An Unpersuasive Caricature

When arguing to change the law, the plaintiff starts on the wrong foot with a caricature of what the single-firm focus requires. According to the plaintiff, a single-firm orientation means that "fiduciaries have no duty (or ability) to consider the costs of their decisions on the typical stockholders' portfolios, even if those costs far outweigh any benefit received as holders of company shares." That is not true. Directors must seek to maximize the value of the firm for the ultimate benefit of its stockholders. That can involve considering a broad spectrum of issues, including how a decision affects stakeholders, the economy, and society. Directors who cause their corporation to become a pariah because its actions consistently or profoundly harm the broader economy will not be able to create durable long-term value for firm-specific stockholders. Directors can and should consider those issues when making decisions about what will promote the value of the firm over the long-term.

## 2. The Unpersuasive Authorities

Moving on to the authorities that the plaintiff cites, the section of the plaintiff's brief that argues for changing the law references only four. Each asserts that diversified institutional investors should prioritize market returns over individual company returns. ^146 None argue that directors themselves have a duty to maximize the returns of diversified investors over individual company returns The first two authorities were written for investment funds. They do not discuss the duties of corporate directors. They need not be considered further.

The other two authorities are law review articles that at least discuss director duties, but not at the level of arguing for duties to diversified investors. In the first article, Professor Jeffrey Gordon argues that investors should exercise their stockhold-er-level rights on a portfolio basis. ^148He then explains why the business judgment rule would protect directors who made business decisions consistent with a portfolio-based investment model. ^149 He does not contend that director fiduciary duties flow towards diversified investors, nor that they should. He only argus that institutional investors should use their rights to encourage directors to act as if they were, and that the law is sufficiently flexible that directors will not be held liable if they comply. . . .
[T]he plaintiff [also] cites The Economic Structure of Corporate Law by Frank Easterbrook and Daniel Fischel. ^152 Published in 1991, the authors advance a booklength argument for reconceiving corporate law to fit the premises of the law-andeconomics movement. Like other scholars from that movement, they assume that legal rules should be evaluated from the perspective of diversified investors. Thus, they argue that, the investor wants to maximize the value of his holdings, not the value of a given stock. Whenever there is a question about the apportionment of gain, the investor prefers whatever rule maximizes the net gain to be had-which means increasing the probability of a gain-producing transaction and reducing the costs of realizing each gain. The rules for dealing with gain-creating opportunities will be established before any particular opportunity is in sight, and so each investor will prefer the set of rules that maximizes the total value (wealth) enjoyed by investors, without regard to how the return is shared among corporations. ^153

They also anticipate the plaintiff's argument that "[a] person who holds a diversified portfolio has an investment in the economy as a whole and therefore wants 146. See PAB 33-34 (first citing Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer, A Legal Framework for Impact: Sustainability Impact in Investor Decision-Making 122 (2021) (stating that "[t]he more diversified a portfolio, the less logical it may be to engage in stewardship to secure enterprise specific value protection or enhancement"); then citing Principles for Resp. Inv., Active Ownership 2.0: The Evolution Stewardship Urgently Needs 5 (2019) (explaining risk of "[a] company strengthening its position by externalising [sic] costs onto others" and noting that "[t]he net result for the [diversified] investor can be negative when the costs across the rest of the portfolio (or market/economy) outweigh the gains to the company"); then citing John C. Coffee, Jr., The Coming Shift in Shareholder Activism: From "Firm-Specific" to "Systematic Risk" Proxy Campaigns (and How to Enable them), 16 Brook. J. Corp. Fin. \& Com. L. 45, 46-47 (2021) (noting that because "change at one firm can affect the value of other firms in the portfolio," activism will seek "to engineer a net gain for the portfolio, possibly by reducing 'negative externalities' that one firm is imposing on other firms in the investor's portfolio"); and then citing Jeffrey N. Gordon, Systematic Stewardship, 47 J. Corp. L. 627, 631 (2022) (noting diversified investor "may regard its risk-adjusted returns as enhanced rather than reduced by measures that reduce expected returns on a portion of its portfolio")).
148. See Gordan [sic], Systematic Stewardship, supra, at 648-52.
149. Id. at 666-70.
152. See PAB at 35 (citing Frank H. Easterbrook \& Daniel R. Fischel, The Economic Structure of Corporate Law (1991)).
153. Id. at 28 .
whatever social or private governance rules maximize the value of all firms put together. He is not interested in maximizing one firm's value if that comes out of the hide of some other corporation."154

Easterbrook and Fischel do not cite any law to support those premises. They proffer them as assertions of fact that are really assumptions. Based on those assumptions, they critique corporate law rules that fail to fulfill their expectations. . . .

Third, and perhaps most strikingly, the plaintiff elsewhere cites an article by Professor Richard Booth for the propositions that "[r]ational investors diversify" and that "most commentators have naturally assumed that fiduciary duty should be construed as if owed to a diversified stockholder." ^169 But Booth argues against the plaintiff's proposal. After comparing the single-firm model with a diversified-investor model, he comes out in favor of the single-firm model. In reaching that conclusion, he cites the difficulties involved in making decisions based on the interests of diversified stockholders and the evident stockholder preference for pure-play firms and against conglomerates. He observes that "diversified stockholders, who are supposedly risk-neutral, prefer management to behave as if they were not risk-neutral." He concludes that the single-firm model of fiduciary duties "makes sense even if in fact a given corporation's stock is owned predominantly by diversified shareholders."

Meanwhile, the plaintiff does not address compelling counterarguments to a diversified-investor model. An important article by Professors Marcel Kahan and Edward Rock explains that orienting fiduciary duties toward diversified investors creates pathologies of its own. ^176 They refer to the diversified-investor model as a form of "welfarism," which rejects the faith that market forces will promote general welfare and lacks confidence in the government's ability to set proper boundary constraints. Because it rejects these underpinnings of shareholderism, it also departs from the focus that shareholderism places on firm value. Instead, it embraces a corporate purpose that includes objectives that are extraneous to the corporation. As the political system has proven itself ineffective in addressing major social problems, welfarism thus looks to corporations to internalize externalities, and promote social welfare, directly. ^177

Welfarism also has to confront the same lack of consensus about the proper responses to social and economic problems that inhibits political solutions. "[I]f we, as citizens and voters in political elections, cannot generate effective political solutions [to social and economic problems], why would we, as shareholders and voters in corporate elections, be more successful in inducing companies to create solutions at the firm level?"182 . . .

In short, the diversified-stockholder model is not a panacea. It too generates tradeoffs.

155. Richard A. Booth, Stockholders, Stakeholders, and Bagholders (or How Investor Diversification Affects Fiduciary Duty), 53 Bus. Law. 429, 430 (1998).
156. Marcel Kahan \& Edward Rock, Corporate Governance Welfarism, 15 J. Legal Analysis 108 (2023)
157. Id. at 110 .
158. Id. at 123 .
Taken as a whole, the plaintiff's authorities fail to provide sufficient support for changing the law that has governed corporations for two centuries and, during that time, generated unparalleled economic prosperity. At most, the plaintiff has shown that (i) some stakeholder advocates think it would be a better world if directors' duties ran to diversified owners and (ii) some scholars assume that fiduciary duties operate in that fashion. But there are other voices who raise serious questions about the benefits of the diversified-investor model. The plaintiff has not made a convincing case that fiduciary duties should run to diversified investors
# 3. The Problem of Externalities 

The plaintiff's strongest argument in favor of the diversified investor model rests not on legal authorities, but rather on his assertion that the single-firm model is more likely to generate negative externalities. That is a serious concern. Delaware law is not blind to externalities. Nor should anyone be. The real question is how best to address them. . . .

In addition to his extra-judicial writings on these topics, Chief Justice [Strine] made clear - originally while serving on this court - that directors cannot permit the corporations they serve to ignore externality regulation in the pursuit of greater profit. As he famously wrote, "Delaware law does not charter law breakers."193 The ability of corporations to pursue profit is "subject to a critical statutory floor, which is the requirement that Delaware corporations only pursue 'lawful business' by 'lawful acts.'"194

By imposing that statutory floor, Delaware law squarely rejects the Chicago School concept of "law as price." That concept posits that a firm may "find it advantageous to violate a law deliberately and pay the penalty for the same reason that an individual in some cases may prefer to breach a contract and pay damages. Because the gains from breach or violation presumably exceed the social costs (as reflected in the penalty), compliance with the statute or contract is undesirable from a personal as well as a social perspective." ^196 From that perspective, "[m]anagers have no general obligation to avoid violating regulatory laws, when violations are profitable to the firm."197 Stated more broadly, managers do not have an ethical duty to obey economic regulatory laws just because the laws exist. They must determine the importance of these laws. The penalties Congress names for disobedience are a measure of how much it wants firms to sacrifice in order to adhere to the rules; the idea of optimal sanctions is based on the supposition that managers not only may but also should violate the rules when it is profitable to do so. ^198

194. Id.
195. Daniel R. Fischel, The Corporate Governance Movement, 35 Vand. L. Rev. 1259, 1271 (1982).
196. Frank H. Easterbrook \& Daniel R. Fischel, Antitrust Suits by Targets of Tender Offers, 80 Mich. L. Rev. 1155,1168 n. 36 (1982)
197. Id. at 1177 n. 57
A proponent of an extreme version of law as price could argue with a straight face that fiduciaries have an obligation to breach the law if, by doing so, they can maximize profits for stockholders. ^199

Delaware law stands for precisely the opposite proposition. "[A] fiduciary of a Delaware corporation cannot be loyal to a Delaware corporation by knowingly causing it to seek profit by violating the law. ^2200 Arguing law as price and equating positive laws with contracts might still get a passing grade in an economics course. It gets an F in a class on Delaware corporate law.

By explicitly rejecting the notion that a board of directors can act loyally when consciously deciding to violate positive law in pursuit of greater profits, Delaware ensures that positive laws and regulations have bite. Through those laws and regulations, governments can impose meaningful restrictions on externalities. Through its corporate law, Delaware supports those efforts.

It is frankly difficult for Delaware to use corporate law to do more. Reformers who look to Delaware law to address externalities must acknowledge the larger political environment. Delaware is one of fifty states, each of which can offer entities embodying different corporate law packages. Delaware is not California. Among the fifty states, Delaware has one of the smaller human populations (only around one million souls), one of the smallest geographical areas (albeit conveniently located), and a relatively small economy (though mighty in spirit). Delaware does not have the market power to force anyone to use its corporations, its law, or its courts. Delaware must identify niches where it has a comparative advantage - like corporate law - so that entrepreneurs want to use its corporations, legal practitioners want to choose its law, and parties want to litigate in its courts.

Delaware has traditionally filled the corporate law niche by taking a distinctively nonpartisan, technocratic approach. Delaware seeks to supply corporate practitioners with a flexible legal framework, broadly enabling in character but subject to some mandatory floors, that gives managers (framed broadly) expansive discretion to take risks and pursue profit, while at the same time protecting the legitimate rights and expectations of investors.

Delaware has not used its corporate law to address hot-button social issues or to intervene in societal debates. Depending on an observer's political leanings, there are any number of salient issues that Delaware might use its corporate law to address. But to the extent the General Assembly sought to intervene on any of them, entrepreneurs who did not like the answer could incorporate their firms elsewhere. Strong externality regulation is just one example. If the General Assembly sought to make Delaware the externality regulatory for the country (or the world), corporations who did not agree could readily opt out.

200. Massy, 2011 WL. 2176479, at *20.
The lesson is a broader one. State-based corporate law in general, and Delaware law in particular, is a poor vehicle for addressing externalities. Delaware law mandates that its entities and the fiduciaries who manage them comply with positive law. That legal requirement promotes legal compliance in its own right, while also providing a mechanism for holding fiduciaries accountable when they knowingly cause an entity to violate positive law. To ask more from state-based corporate law is to pick the wrong tool for the job.

In the end, the plaintiff paints a Panglossian ideal of a world without externalities. I would like to live in that world. But this lawsuit is not the right vehicle for creating that future or for making the trip.

# 4. The Availability of Private Ordering Solutions 

As this decision has demonstrated, the plaintiff asks this court to upset decades of corporate law by holding that all Delaware corporations, or at least all systemically significant corporations, must be managed for the benefit of diversified investors. That is a bold ask by any measure, and it is particularly unwarranted given that Delaware law already permits corporations to opt into that model through private ordering. To the extent corporations find the plaintiff's arguments persuasive, they can implement the plaintiff's framework.

## a. Section 102(a)(3) and a Limited Purpose Clause

"[One] way the DGCL permits corporate planners to tailor the powers of corporate fiduciaries and the duties they owe is through a limited purpose clause." ^203 Delaware law does not use the term "purpose" to refer to the proper orientation of directors' duties. Fiduciary duties arise in equity and result from the stockholders' entrustment of capital to a firm over which the directors hold virtually plenary authority. Delaware instead uses the term "purpose" to mean the goal that the corporation seeks to achieve. ^204 In the era of special charters, it might have been to build and operate a toll road, bridge, or iron works.

A corporation's charter must state " [t] he nature of the business or purposes to be conducted or promoted. ^205 Delaware law authorizes the certificate of incorporation to provide that "the purpose of the corporation is to engage in any lawful act or activity for which corporations may be organized under the General Corporation Law of Delaware," with the effect that "all lawful acts and activities shall be within the purposes of the corporation, except for express limitations. ^2206 Most charters take that approach and do not specify a specific purpose. But special purposes remain, such as only investing in real estate.

204. See Asaf Raz, A Purpose-Based Theory of Corporate Law, 65 Vill. L. Rev. 523, 535 (2020) (referring to the charter-defined purpose as the corporation's goals); see also George A. Mocsary, Freedom of Corporate Purpose, 2016 B.Y.U. L. Rev. 1319, 1364-68 (2017) (discussing the difference between "strategic" and "tactical" corporate purposes, in which the "strategic" purpose reflects the corporation's role in society and "tactical" purposes reflect its specific areas of focus).
205. 8 Del. C. ยง 102(a) (3).
206. Id.
As this decision has discussed, corporate directors have an obligation to seek to maximize the long-term value of the corporation for the benefit of its stockholders. Absent a narrow purpose clause, directors have the flexibility to pursue the business they believe to be the value-maximizing option. But if the charter contains a limited purpose clause, then that provision constrains the choice set. Rather than freely seeking to maximize the long-term value of the corporation for the benefit of its stockholders, directors acting loyally must strive in good faith to fulfill their fiduciary duties within the ambit of the narrowly defined purpose. The narrow purpose clause "limits the directors' powers and concomitant duties" by denying the corporation the power to engage in acts outside of a narrowly defined purpose and rendering non-compliant acts void.

Using a narrow purpose clause, corporate planners could create a firm where the directors were constrained to operate in a manner that would not harm diversified investors. For example, a certificate of incorporation might state:

The purpose of the corporation is to pursue only businesses that benefit diversified equity investors and do not create externalities that benefit the corporation at the expense of the economy as a whole.

With the corporation limited by such a purpose clause, directors could not cause the corporation to pursue lines of business that generated negative externalities that harmed diversified investors. If the directors took action to cause the corporation to engage in activities that harmed diversified investors, a plaintiff could seek to have their actions declared void. . . .

# NOTES AND QUESTIONS 

1. Although McRitchie held that fiduciary duty runs to stockholders of a specific firm, Vice Chancellor Laster explained, "Directors must seek to maximize the value of the firm for the ultimate benefit of its stockholders. That can involve considering a broad spectrum of issues, including how a decision affects stakeholders, the economy, and society." How do you interpret this distinction in practice? Is it consistent with Dodge v. Ford Motor Co.?
2. In McRitchie, the court offered private ordering alternatives to address the issue of negative externalities. Specifically, Vice Chancellor Laster argued that the corporation could amend the articles of incorporation to adopt a stakeholder governance model. As Stephen Bainbridge notes, this argument is in tension with another landmark Delaware Chancery Court decision, eBay Domestic Holdings, Inc. v. Newmark, 16 A.3d 1, 34 (Del. Ch. 2010), in which Chancellor Chandler stated: "Having chosen a for-profit corporate form, the craigslist directors are bound by the fiduciary duties and standards that accompany that form. Those standards include acting to promote the value of the corporation for the benefit of its stockholders. The 'Inc.' after the company name has to mean at least that." See Stephen Bainbridge, Some Preliminary Thoughts About VC Laster's New Delaware Chancery Court Opinion in McRitchie v. Zuckerberg, Professorbainbridge.com (May 2, 2024). If Vice Chancellor Laster is correct that founders can opt out of shareholder primacy, why would the Delaware legislature need to have adopted a public benefit corporation statute, the subject of the next section?
3. In dismissing "portfolio primacy," Vice Chancellor Laster quoted Marcel Kahan and Edward Rock, who state, "[I]f we, as citizens and voters in political elections, cannot generate effective political solutions, why would we, as shareholders and voters in corporate elections, be more successful in inducing companies to create solutions at the firm level?" Marcel Kahan \& Edward Rock, Corporate Governance Welfarism, 15 J. Legal Analysis 108, 123 (2023). One possible response is that shareholders are wealthier and better educated than typical voters; moreover, the large asset managers that influence corporate votes may better be able to translate consensus views into action. Kahan and Rock ultimately dismiss this line of thinking: "But if that is the argument, shareholder welfarism would be in danger of morphing into a property-based voting system where larger (and thus likely wealthier) shareholders or the 'elites' who control institutional investors may vote to sacrifice firm value at the expense of smaller (and less wealthy) shareholders (and beneficiaries) with different preferences. This outcome of welfarism would lack political legitimacy." Id. Do you agree?


[^0]: 3. See Brad Stone, Costco CEO Craig Jelinek Leads the Cheapest, Happiest Company in the World, Bloomberg Businessweek, Companies \& Industry (June 6, 2013) (describing Costco Wholesale, the sec-ond-largest retailer in the U.S. behind Walmart, as an anomaly in an age marked by turmoil and downsizing: despite challenges to the industry, Costco paid (as of 2013) its hourly workers an average of $20.89 an hour, not including overtime (vs. the minimum wage of $7.25 an hour); by comparison, Walmart said its average wage for full-time employees in the U.S. was $12.67 an hour, according to a letter to activist Ralph Nader; 88 percent of Costco employees had company-sponsored health insurance; Walmart said that "more than half" of its did. Costco workers with coverage paid premiums that amounted to less than 10 percent of the overall cost of their plans. It treats its employees well in the belief that a happier work environment will result in a more profitable company. "I just think people need to make a living wage with health benefits," says Jelinek. "It also puts more money back into the economy and creates a healthier country. It's really that simple.").
[^0]: 154. Id. at 29 .
[^0]: 193. In re Massey Energy Co., 2011 WL 2176479, at *20 (Del. Ch. May 21, 2011). See generally Asaf Raz, The Legal Primacy Norm, 74 Fla. L. Rev. 933 (2022).
[^0]: 199. See David L. Engel, An Approach to Corporate Social Responsibility, 32 Stan. L. Rev. 1, 34-55 (1979) (arguing that corporations can and should maximize profits by factoring in the cost of regulatory and legal sanctions discounted by likelihood of detection and successful enforcement). See generally Cinthia A. Williams, Corporate Compliance With the Law In the Era of Efficiency, 76 N.C. L. Rev. 1265, 1285-1300 (1998) (collecting and summarizing authorities endorsing the view of "law as price").
[^0]: 203. New Enter. Assocs. 14, L.P. v. Rich, 295 A.3d 520, 553 (Del. Ch. 2023).