
UPA (1914) §§6,7,8,18,40
UPA (1997) §§202,203,401,802,806
Carrying out a business venture as partners may result in very different risks and rewards than would ensue from carrying out the same venture as employer and employee, lender and borrower, or through other contractual arrangements. Unfortunately, determining whether one is or is not in a partnership is not always easy. If the business relationship sours, the legal nature of that relationship may become a prime focus of litigation between the parties, and the label placed on the relationship by the parties is not controlling. Accordingly, participants in a business venture will sometimes discover to their surprise that they are not partners (or joint venturers) when they had always thought they were, or that they are partners (or joint venturers) despite their contrary assumption.

## Ziemann v. Grosz <br> Supreme Court of North Dakota, 2024 <br> 10 N.W.3d 801

Crothers, Justice.
Juanita Grosz appeals from a judgment entered after a bench trial. Jason Ziemann cross appeals from a summary judgment dismissal of his claims. . . .

## I

Grosz and her husband operated a wrecking and salvage business called Grosz Wrecking. They lived in a home located on the same property as the business. Ziemann, who is Grosz's grandson, became involved in the operation after her husband died. Ziemann moved into the home in 2014, but Grosz continued to own the property. In 2022, Grosz sought to evict Ziemann after he refused to purchase the home. Ziemann then sued Grosz alleging they entered into an oral partnership agreement. Ziemann sought a declaration that a partnership existed and brought claims for accounting and dissolution of the partnership, breach of fiduciary duties, and tortious interference with a business relationship. Grosz filed an answer denying the existence of a partnership and pleaded a counterclaim for trespass. . . .

The case proceeded to a bench trial. Each party testified along with accountants. real estate valuation experts, and Janell Ziemann, who is Grosz's daughter and Ziemann's mother. The parties presented conflicting evidence concerning their business arrangement. Grosz testified she agreed to pay Ziemann a commission for selling her wrecking inventory. Ziemann testified Grosz agreed to give him an ownership interest in the business and a share of proceeds from what they sold.

The district court found the parties orally agreed to form a partnership with the following terms:
"The initial terms included a 75%/25% profit split of all existing inventory which was amended to a 70%/30% split of existing inventory minus the items that were specifically exempted from the agreement by Ms. Grosz. The parties also agreed Mr. Ziemann was to receive 100% of the proceeds of sales from newly acquired inventory. Mr. Ziemann was permitted to reside in the home located on the property owned by Ms. Grosz as a result of the 5% increase of sale proceeds to Ms. Grosz. It was also clear to the Court that Mr. Ziemann was responsible for most of the business expenses associated with the day-to-day business operations of Grosz Wrecking outside of the property taxes and expenses paid by Ms. Grosz."

The court also found Grosz "agreed to give [Ziemann] a 70% ownership stake in Grosz Wrecking." The court ordered an accounting and dissolution of the partnership. The court dismissed Grosz's trespass claim reasoning Ziemann's occupancy of the property was part of the parties' partnership agreement. The court ordered he "will be permitted to continue living on the property until the business is dissolved." The court entered judgment requiring the partnership assets to be liquidated and "any surplus" to be distributed 70% to Ziemann and 30% to Grosz. The court also awarded Ziemann costs in the amount of $8,419.84. Both parties appeal.

# II 

Grosz asserts a number of the district court's findings concerning the parties' dealings and intent are clearly erroneous, and she argues the court misapplied partnership law. Grosz also argues the court erred when it dismissed her trespass claim and when it awarded Ziemann costs as the prevailing party. . . .

## B

Grosz argues the district court erred when it determined the parties formed a partnership. She asserts Ziemann was an independent contractor who received commission based on sales. She also argues that even if a partnership existed, she did not contribute inventory to it. Alternatively, if she did contribute inventory, she asserts she is entitled to a credit for her contributions in the winding up process.

A partnership is "an association of two or more persons to carry on as co-owners a business for profit[.]" N.D.C.C. § 45-13-01(19). "A partnership is an entity distinct from the partnership's partners." Whether individuals have formed a partnership is governed by N.D.C.C. § 45-14-02, which provides:

1. Except as otherwise provided in subsection 2, the association of two or more persons to carry on as co-owners a business for profit forms a partnership, whether or not the persons intend to form a partnership. . . .
3. In determining whether a partnership is formed, the following rules apply:
a. Joint tenancy, tenancy in common, tenancy by the entireties, joint property, common property, or part ownership does not by itself establish a partnership, even if the co-owners share profits made by the use of the property.
b. The sharing of gross returns does not by itself establish a partnership, even if the persons sharing them have a joint or common right or interest in property from which the returns are derived.
c. A person who receives a share of the profits of a business is presumed to be a partner in the business, unless the profits were received in payment:
(1) Of a debt by installments or otherwise;
(2) For services as an independent contractor or of wages or other compensation to an employee;
(3) Of rent;
(4) Of an annuity or other retirement benefit to a beneficiary, representative, or designee of a deceased or retired partner;
(5) Of interest or other charge on a loan, even if the amount of payment varies with the profits of the business, including a direct or indirect present or future ownership of the collateral, or rights to income, proceeds, or increase in value derived from the collateral; or (6) For the sale of the goodwill of a business or other property by installments or otherwise....

# 1 

Grosz claims evidence proves the parties did not intend to form a partnership. Grosz asserts the parties' dealings establish a "commission style arrangement" where Ziemann was an independent contractor and his share of the profit was commission for sales.

Intent to form a partnership is "[o]ne of the most important tests" to determine whether a partnership exists. Ziegler v. Dahl, 691 N.W.2d 271 (N.D. 2005). "[T]he focus is not on whether individuals subjectively intended to form a partnership, but on whether the individuals intended to jointly carry on a business for profit." Id. Intent can be derived from the actions of the parties and does not need to be vocalized or memorialized in writing. Id. at $15. Individuals "may inadvertently create a partnership" despite a subjective intention not to do so. Id. at $14 (quoting Uniform Partnership Act, § 202, cmt. 1 (1997)).

Grosz identifies paperwork indicating a partnership was not formed, including tax returns, documents related to loans, insurance policies, and Ziemann's divorce filings. She also notes the parties did not share a joint bank account. The district court acknowledged the parties "made every effort to not describe themselves as partners in any writing[.]" The court nonetheless found "the parties' actions show the opposite." The court found Grosz intended to operate Grosz Wrecking with Ziemann for a profit hoping he would someday carry on the business. The court's findings have evidentiary support. For example, when asked why she agreed to let Ziemann "be part of the business with you," Grosz testified: "I thought once he owned it, it would materialize into a good business for us and some day he would maybe own it all but it never happened. Not enough hours put in." The court's choice between two permissible views of the weight of the evidence is not clearly erroneous.
Grosz argues the co-ownership element indicates the parties did not form a partnership. Grosz acknowledges Ziemann exercised control over business operations, but maintains his control was consistent with his role as an independent contractor. Grosz argues she could have instructed Ziemann to not sell "her inventory" but choose not to do so "because she had no reason to at any point prior to Ziemann rejecting the agreement to purchase the house."
"If partners are co-owners of a business, they each have the power of ultimate control." Ziegler, 2005 ND 10, 121, 691 N.W.2d 271. "Control is an indispensable component of co-ownership which, when combined with profit sharing, strongly suggests the existence of a partnership." Gangl, 281 N.W.2d at 580; see also Tarnavsky v. Tarnavsky, 147 F.3d 674, 677-78 (8th Cir. 1998) (stating co-ownership includes the "sharing of profits and losses as well as the power of control in the management of the business."). A partner does not have to actually exercise control "but only needs to have the right to exercise control in the management of the business." Ziegler, at 121.

The district court found Ziemann attended auctions, developed a website, created business cards, and with Grosz's consent, held himself out to the community as an owner of Grosz Wrecking. The court also found Ziemann paid the majority of the business's expenses, including insurance, advertising, fuel, electrical, trucking, and maintenance. The court reasoned: "Someone who was merely hired as a salesman would not typically be responsible for dictating the entire business model for the business and making decisions about when, and for how much, to sell." The court found the parties were operating a partnership as co-owners with Ziemann focusing on sales and operations and Grosz focusing on administrative responsibilities. The court determined "they each had control in how the business functioned and operated." The court's findings have evidentiary support and are not clearly erroneous.

# 3 

The last element of partnership formation is a profit motive. Tarnavsky, 2003 ND 110, 17, 666 N.W.2d 444. Although Grosz characterizes the parties' dealings as a "commission style arrangement," she does not dispute the district court's finding that the business was operated for a profit. Although the parties provided conflicting accounts of their business arrangement, evidence supports the district court's findings that they intended to jointly carry on the wrecking business for a profit and shared control of the business while doing so.

The district court's findings are based largely on credibility assessments. The court found both parties' testimony lacked credibility on certain issues but determined Ziemann's account of the parties' agreement and dealings was more credible. "A choice between two permissible views of the weight of the evidence is not clearly erroneous.'" Kartes, 2013 ND 106, 125, 831 N.W.2d 731 (quoting Hageman, 2013 ND 29, 18, 827 N.W.2d 23). Taken together, the court's findings support a legal determination that Grosz and Ziemann formed a partnership. The district court did not err when it held the parties formed a partnership by oral agreement.
# C 

Grosz argues that even if the parties formed a partnership, she did not contribute her salvage inventory to the partnership.

Property is partnership property when it is acquired by or transferred to a partnership or when it is acquired by or transferred to an individual in the individual's capacity as a partner. Property purchased with partnership assets is presumed to belong to the partnership. A presumption also exists that assets acquired by a partner without use of partnership assets and without reference to the partnership or the individual's capacity as a partner are not partnership property. "The determination whether property held in the name of an individual partner belongs to the partnership is a question of fact." Eckert v. Eckert, 425 N.W.2d 914, 915 (N.D. 1988). "The relevant inquiry is whether the partners intended that the property in question be partnership property or individual property." Id.

Grosz argues she acquired the inventory of Grosz Wrecking from her husband's estate in her individual capacity and she did not contribute it to a partnership. In her words, if a partnership existed, "this was a partnership where Grosz did not contribute assets to the partnership beyond the proceeds of any inventory actually sold." The district court found Grosz objected to, but ultimately acquiesced in, Ziemann selling inventory that she now claims was her individual property. The court reasoned that Grosz's acquiescence in Ziemann's exercise of control over the inventory indicated it was partnership property. The court also found that when inventory was sold checks were written to Grosz Wrecking and not Grosz individually. The court's finding that Grosz contributed inventory to be sold in the course of the partnership is supported by the evidence and not clearly erroneous.

## D

Grosz argues that even if she contributed inventory to the partnership, the district court erred when it did not allow her a credit in the winding up process for the contributions she made.

Partnership partners are deemed to have an account that is credited with the amount of money and property, net of the amount of any liabilities, they contributed to the partnership. The partners' accounts also must be charged with the partners' share of losses and an amount equal to the property and money, net of the amount of any liabilities, distributed by the partnership to the partner. Under N.D.C.C. §45-20-07(1), when winding up a partnership, after the partnership's obligations are satisfied, "[a]ny surplus must be applied to pay in cash the net amount distributable to partners in accordance with their right to distributions under subsection 2," which provides:

The partnership shall make a distribution to a partner in an amount equal to any excess of the credits over the charges in the partner's account. A partner shall contribute to the partnership an amount equal to any excess of the charges over the credits in the partner's account."
N.D.C.C. §45-20-07(2). These provisions are default rules and do not apply if the partners have agreed otherwise. N.D.C.C. §45-13-03. Whether partners have agreed to override a statutory default rule is a finding of fact subject to the clearly erroneous standard of review. See Carlson v. Carlson, 2011 ND 168, 115, 802 N.W.2d 436 (affirming a district court's finding that partners agreed there would be no equalization of unequal contributions).

The district court determined Grosz was not entitled to a credit for her contributions holding "Ms. Grosz formed a partnership with Mr. Ziemann and agreed to give him a 70% ownership stake in Grosz Wrecking." However, as previously discussed, the court also found Grosz "intended the existing inventory to be part of her and Mr. Ziemann's partnership." If Grosz intended to contribute her inventory to the partnership, neither she nor Ziemann personally own it. "Property acquired by a partnership is property of the partnership and not of the partners individually." N.D.C.C. §45-14-03. Ziemann has not identified any evidence the parties discussed or agreed to specific winding up provisions that differ from the statutory defaults. Absent a contrary agreement, Grosz is entitled to a settlement of her account under N.D.C.C. §45-20-07. The district court erred when it did not apply the statutory default winding up provisions.

# E 

Grosz argues the district court erred when it determined she did not prove her claim for trespass related to Ziemann's purported refusal to vacate the home at the salvage yard. She claims she revoked her consent for Ziemann to be on the property by serving an eviction notice. However, the district court found Grosz agreed to allow Ziemann to live in the home because he was responsible for the day-to-day wrecking operations. The court also found Grosz's permission for Ziemann to live in the home was a term of the parties' oral partnership agreement. The court's finding is supported by the evidence. Consequently, the court did not err in ordering Ziemann is entitled to live in the home and be present on the property until the winding up process is complete. . . .

## IV

The district court did not err when it held the parties formed a partnership and Grosz contributed property to it, when it dismissed Grosz's trespass claim, when it dismissed Ziemann's claims for tortious interference with a business relationship and breach of fiduciary duty, and when it awarded Ziemann costs and disbursements as the prevailing party. The court erred by not applying the N.D.C.C. §45-20-07 default partnership winding up provisions. The case is remanded for the district court to enter judgment consistent with this decision.
# NOTES AND QUESTIONS 

1. In some jurisdictions, most prominently New York, an agreement to share losses appears indispensable to the existence of a partnership. See, e.g., Bailey v. Broder, 1998 WL 13827, at *4 (S.D.N.Y. Jan. 15, 1998) ("individuals must agree to share the losses as well as the profits if their agreement is to be regarded in law as a partnership"). In many jurisdictions an agreement to share losses also is indispensable to the existence of a joint venture. See, e.g., Mallis v. Bankers Tr. Co., 717 F.2d 683, 690 (2d Cir. 1983) ("Under New York law, the crucial element of a joint venture is the existence of a "mutual promise or undertaking of the parties to share in the profits . . . and submit to the burden of making good the losses") (internal citations omitted).
2. UPA (1997) § 401 (a) and its predecessor UPA (1914) § 18(a) both provide that, unless otherwise agreed, partners share partnership losses in the same proportion as they share partnership profits. As a matter of statutory construction, how can an actual agreement to share losses be essential to the characterization of a business association as a partnership, if the statute implies an agreement to share losses in the absence of an actual agreement?
3. One circumstance in which an actual agreement to share losses has been found unnecessary to the characterization of a business relationship as a joint venture or partnership is when one person has provided services and the other capital to a common enterprise. See, for example, Florida Tomato Packers, Inc. v. Wilson, 296 So. 2d 536 (Fla. 3d Dist. Ct. App. 1974), in which the court found that "a partnership and/or joint venture relationship . . . existed between George F. Lytton and Florida Tomato . . ." despite the lack of an actual agreement to share losses, because "a duty to share in losses actually and impliedly exists as a matter of law in a situation where one party supplies the labor, experience and skill, and the other the necessary capital since in the event of a loss, the party supplying the knowhow would have exercised his skill in vain and the party supplying the capital investment would have suffered a diminishment thereof." Id. at 539.
4. Some jurisdictions determine whether a joint venture has been formed without relying on specific indispensable factors. See, e.g., John Nagle Co. v. Gokey, 799 A.2d 1225, 1227 (Me. 2002):
"A joint venture is an association between two or more individuals or entities who agree to pool their efforts and resources to jointly seek profits." Nancy W. Bayley, Inc. v. Employment Sec. Comm'n, 472 A.2d 1374, 1377 (Mc. 1984). Moreover, a joint venture can be found "where persons embark on an undertaking without entering on the prosecution of the business as partners strictly but engage in a common enterprise for their mutual benefit." Simpson v. Richmond Worsted Spinning Co., 128 Me . 22, 29, 145 A. 250, 253-54 (1929) (quoting Hey v. Duncan, 13 F.2d 794, 795 (7th Cir. 1926). Like a partnership, whether a joint venture exists depends upon the circumstances surrounding the parties' relationship. Id. at 30,145 A. at 254 . Therefore, although very similar to a partnership, a joint venture is "generally more limited in scope and duration." Nancy W. Bayley, Inc., 472 A.2d at 1377.
5. Some jurisdictions are quite strict in the factors that must be present to support a finding that a joint venture was formed. For example, see Harriman v. United Dominion Industries, Inc., 693 N.W.2d 44, 50 (S.D. 2005) (internal citations omitted):
We recently set forth six elements necessary to establish a joint venture. These six elements include:
(1) an intent to enter into a joint venture;
(2) an agreement, express or implied, among members of the group;
(3) a common purpose to be carried out by the group;
(4) a joint pecuniary interest in that purpose;
(5) an equal right to a voice in the direction and control of the group; and (6) a right to share in the profits and a duty to share in any losses.

All six elements must be met in order to establish the existence of a joint venture.
6. Akin to the question of whether a partnership has been created is the question of whether a particular person is a partner or, instead, stands in a different relationship to the partnership. Consider a question likely to be of some interest to law students: is a "junior partner" in a law firm who possesses no voting rights on major decisions really a glorified employee or a legitimate "owner" of the firm? This question comes up in a variety of circumstances, including whether a particular person is entitled to the employment discrimination protection afforded by Title VII. Consider the implications of the following discussion of how to distinguish between a partner who is akin to a proprietor and a partner who is akin to an employee.

In large, the critical attributes of proprietary status involve three broad, overlapping categories: ownership, remuneration, and management. . . . [A]lthough myriad factors may influence a court's ultimate decision in a given case, we recount a non-exclusive list of factors that frequently will bear upon such determinations.

Under the first category, relevant factors include investment in the firm, ownership of firm assets, and liability for firm debts and obligations. To the extent that these factors exist, they indicate a proprietary role; to the extent that they do not exist, they indicate a status more akin to that of an employee.

Under the second category, the most relevant factor is whether (and if so, to what extent) the individual's compensation is based on the firm's profits. To the extent that a partner's remuneration is subject to the vagaries of the firm's economic fortunes, her status more closely resembles that of a proprietor; conversely, to the extent that a partner is paid on a straight salary basis, the argument for treating her as an ordinary employee will gain strength. . . .

Under the third category, relevant factors include the right to engage in policymaking; participation in, and voting power with regard to, firm governance; the ability to assign work and to direct the activities of employees within the firm; and the ability to act for the firm and its principals. Once again, to the extent that these factors exist, they indicate a proprietary role.

Serapion v. Martinez, 119 F.3d 982, 990 (1st Cir. 1997).

# PROBLEM 2-1 

Shady entered a bid with the Metro Sewer District ("MSD") to dispose of excess limestone ("spoil") generated by various MSD tunnel projects. While the bid was pending, Shady discovered that Dale had a 20 -acre site suitable for disposal of the spoil. Shady proposed a business arrangement. Dale would allow the spoil to be stored on her land; Dale and Shady would split the profits upon sale of the spoil.

Dale hired an attorney, Harv. At a subsequent meeting at Harv's office, Shady and Dale discussed entering into a partnership. During the discussions, Shady revealed that he was being investigated for a felony-transporting hazardous waste without a license-and that he intended to pay "grease" payments to MSD to ensure winning the bid. After the meeting Harv advised Dale not to do business with Shady, but, if she must, to do so without forming a partnership.

Despite Harv's advice, Dale agreed to allow Shady to store spoil on her land. The parties did not enter into a written agreement. Dale and Shady soon had a falling out. Thereafter, Dale prevented Shady from storing spoil on her land and granted one of Shady's competitors the right to use her land for spoil storage. As a result MSD cancelled its contract with Shady. Shady sued Dale for damages, asserting that Shady and Dale were partners and that Shady had violated her obligations under the partnership agreement.

At trial, Dale testified that she considered herself to be a sole proprietor in the business of storing and selling spoil and that she considered Shady to be an independent contractor who "sold" spoil to her in exchange for half of the profits upon the eventual resale of the spoil. She denied any intent to form a partnership. Shady testified that before the meeting with Harv (1) Dale indicated "that she was interested in partnering up with me," that they "needed to get rolling," and that she would "hire an attorney to legalize the agreement"; and (2) Dale and Shady "came to an agreement that [Shady] would deliver the spoil and Dale would pay the MSD invoices if [Shady] had trouble getting a loan," and that "whatever monies we put into the operation to make it go, we'd get it back when we sold the spoil, and then we'd split the profits 50/50." Shady also testified that after the meeting with Harv (1) he asked Dale "dozens of times" to finalize a written partnership agreement, but "she always came up with something she needed to clear with her attorney"; (2) both he and Dale referred to each other as "partner"; (3) he was involved in negotiations to sell the spoil and had vetoed one potential sale because "the price was way too low"; and (4) he generally was on site to accept delivery of the spoil.

The trial court determined that Dale and Shady were either partners or joint venturers and awarded damages to Shady. Dale appealed. Should the appeals court affirm the trial court's ruling?

# PROBLEM 2-2 

In April 2018, Gary entered into an agreement to sell his restaurant business to Nova. Under the terms of the agreement Nova was required to pay Gary $2,000 per week for a period of six years. The contract provided Gary with the right to control all business decisions made during the six-year payment period.

Nova took over operation of the restaurant on May 1, 2018, but because of her inexperience ran into numerous difficulties. On May 15, 2018, Gary agreed to help Nova with the day-to-day operations for six months. At all times during the six-year payment period, Gary kept close tabs on the restaurant, maintained access to the books and records, occasionally advanced funds needed for restaurant improvements, and frequently consulted with Nova concerning business decisions. In 2020, Nova secretly obtained a line of credit from the First Metro Bank ("FMB"); Nova represented to the bank that the funds were being used for improvements to the restaurant, but, in fact, Nova used the funds personally. In 2021, Nova filed for personal bankruptcy reporting no assets and substantial debt. She listed the loan from FMB as "a joint obligation with Gary, my partner in the restaurant business."

Ultimately FMB filed suit against Gary to recover the sums borrowed by Nova. The trial court determined that Gary and Nova were either partners or joint venturers and awarded damages to FMB. Gary appealed. Should the appeals court affirm the trial court's ruling?


[^0]: "Each partner is entitled to a settlement of all partnership accounts upon winding up the partnership business. In settling accounts among the partners, the profits and losses that result from the liquidation of the partnership assets must be credited and charged to the partner's accounts.