
By 1980, the New Deal ideology and its preference for government regulation of business gave way to a more deregulatory approach. Advocates of free markets, individualism, and elimination of government regulation recaptured political and intellectual influence in America, England, and within a decade, most of the first-world countries. Within corporation law, a similar ideological shift occurred.

The new dominant view of the firm traced its origins to the work of economists working out the implications of the principal-agent problem. These theorists, including prominently Michael Jensen and William Meckling, ^10 emphasized the contractual nature of the firm rather than the distinction between the firm and the market. From this perspective, the firm is described as a nexus of contracts between the various claimants to a share of the gross profits generated by the business. Thus, depicted as a circle, and using Mary's bakery as an example, the firm includes not only the contractual relations between Mary and her employees, but also Mary's contractual relationships with customers, suppliers, lenders, independent contractors, communities in which plants are located, and others with whom Mary contracts in conducting business. Mary as the sole proprietor of the firm is the nexus, the central person, with whom all contracts are made.

When Mary instead chooses to jointly own a bakery with John, the business association which they create becomes the nexus of contracts for the business association. For example, if Mary and John choose to operate as a corporation, all contractual relationships within the firm are made not with Mary and John in their personal capacity, but with the legal corporate entity which owns the firm. Indeed, Mary and John's rights and obligations flow from their contractual agreements with the corporate legal entity.

Strong-form proponents of the nexus-of-contracts view of the firm emphasize that the firm does not exist apart from its constituent relationships. To speak of a corporation as having social responsibility would reify the corporation in a way inconsistent with that view. Significantly, this contractarian view of the firm tends to focus attention away from the corporation as a social institution. Moreover, by its very nature, this microeconomic focus on the individual as the appropriate unit of analysis does not often lead to reform proposals advocating greater government regulation of the corporation or the economy. This understanding of the nexus of contracts theory of the firm ignores the legal significance of the corporation as a purposeful legal entity, and actual owner of the firm, which we will explore in Chapter 4.


[^0]: 10. See Michael C. Jensen \& William H. Meckling, Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs and Ownership Structure, 3 J. Fin. Econ. 305 (1976).