
At the beginning of the nineteenth century, the American economy was dominated by sole proprietorships and, thus, by the classical entrepreneur. By the end of the nineteenth century, a profound transformation was well under way. The ownership of a substantial and increasing percentage of America's industrial wealth was in the hands of business firms organized as corporations, whose owners numbered in the hundreds and thousands.

Writing in 1932, ^5 Adolf Berle and Gardiner Means correctly predicted that the power of the modern corporation would continue to grow and that eventually in every industrial sector, ownership of the means of production would reside in an increasingly small number of corporations. Importantly, Berle and Means identified the key attributes of the "modern corporation" that thereafter would dominate the American economy. Unlike the sole proprietorship, or the closely held firm whose owners usually operated similarly to a sole proprietorship in terms of control of the firm's business, the modern corporation was characterized by a complete separation of ownership from control. In the modern corporation, the firm's managers did not own a controlling amount of the corporation's stock; instead, a great majority of the corporation's stock was in the hands of a large number of passive, geographically dispersed shareholders who had neither the means nor the will to monitor managers or engage in the process of electing the corporation's directors. ^6 As a result, managers perpetuated themselves in office and enjoyed almost total discretion in the operation of the firm.

Berle and Means described the separation of ownership from control in the modern corporation as presenting a fundamental challenge to America's governing 6. Berle \& Means, at 5. Berle and Means found that in more than half of the 200 largest publicly traded corporations, management's stock ownership constituted such a small percentage of the voting stock as to be irrelevant in the election of directors. Id. at 94,114,117.
ideology. Free market ideology, rooted in the work of Adam Smith, viewed the individual entrepreneur - the sole proprietor who owned and managed her own firm - as the primary motor driving the economy from the producer side of the equation. In turn, private property in the means of production was justified as central to a system depending on the voluntary actions of each market participant. Private property in the means of production allows and creates incentives for the entrepreneur to use her talents and capital in an effort to maximize her own wealth and happiness. The entrepreneur's selfish use of her property - her effort to make a profit and accumulate wealth - results in the best possible allocation of resources and the maximization of all citizens' wealth and happiness.

In Berle and Means's view, the modern corporation destroyed the theoretical underpinnings of the free enterprise system.

It has been assumed that, if the individual is protected in the right both to use his own property as he sees fit and to receive the full fruits of its use, his desire for personal gain, for profits, can be relied upon as an effective incentive to his efficient use of any industrial property he may possess.

In the [modern] corporation, such an assumption no longer holds. As we have seen, it is no longer the individual, himself, who uses his wealth. Those in control of that wealth, and therefore in a position to secure industrial efficiency and produce profits, are no longer as owners entitled to the bulk of such profits. . . . The explosion of the atom of property destroys the basis of the old assumption that the quest for profits will spur the owner of industrial property to its effective use. ^7

Berle and Means clearly worried about the agency cost problem associated with separation of ownership and control that became the center of subsequent developments by contractarian-oriented scholars described below. More broadly, however, Berle and Means were concerned about the problem of power. They identified the modern corporation, and the larger corporate system, as new institutions that compete with and threaten to supplant the nation-state as the dominant form of social organization. They worried because the modern corporation "involves a concentration of power in the economic field comparable to the concentration of economic power in the mediaeval church or of political power in the modern state." ^8 Significantly, Berle and Means concluded that the corporation should now be analyzed as a social organization, and with a view to determining how managers' power should be constrained for the public good. ^9

Berle and Means categorized three types of possible responses to the economic power of the modern corporation and its managers. Society could bend the modern corporation and its managers to the will of the shareholders, so that shareholders, collectively, would act as real owners. Alternatively, society could recognize that corporate managers have absolute power, constrained only by their sense of morality and public duty. A third possibility would be to treat the interests of both managers and shareholders as subordinate to the paramount claims of society.

8. Berle \& Means, at 352 .
9. Berle \& Means, at 353-357.
From the New Deal onward for nearly 50 years, federal law and policy makers often chose to pursue the third approach identified by Berle and Means - subordinating private property in the means of production to the legitimate claims of the larger society. The institution of private property that had given the entrepreneur almost total control over his business - the right to hire and fire whomever he wanted for whatever reason, the right to set wages and working conditions, the right to pollute air and water rather than incur costs for less environmentally harmful methods of production-would yield to competing interests within the larger society.


[^0]: 5. Adolf A. Berle Jr. \& Gardiner C. Means, The Modern Corporation and Private Property 340-341 (Macmillan, 1932) (hereinafter "Berle \& Means").
[^0]: 7. Berle \& Means, at 8-9.