
As the industrial revolution unfolded in the early 19^th century, advances in iron casting and other production processes paved the way for mass producing decorative goods (such as stoves, radiators, and other cast-iron consumer goods). See Jason J. Du Mont \& Mark D. Janis, The Origins of American Design Patent Protection, 88 INDIANA L.J. 837, 849-51 (2013). These advances shifted competition toward the decorative elements for consumer goods. Relatedly, the growth of the textile industries during the industrial revolution spawned piracy of popular and attractive rug designs, clothing, and other imprinted goods. Such ornamentation of useful articles did not, however, fit easily within utility patent or copyright protection. Although advances in the production processes and casting machinery were eligible for utility patents, the particular designs resulting from such processes and machinery did not qualify for utility patent protection. And copyright protection extended only to books, maps, charts, prints, engravings, and musical compositions, not to three-dimensional works.

England's more developed manufacturing economy had already confronted these issues through the enactment of copyright-based design protection regimes. See An Act to secure to Proprietors of Designs for Articles of Manufacture the Copyright of such Designs for a limited Time, 2 Vict., c. 17 (1839) (Eng.); An Act for the Encouragement of the Arts of designing and printing Linens, Cottons, Callicoes, and Muslims, by vesting the Properties thereof in the Designers, Printers, and Proprietors, for a limited Time, 27 Geo. 3, c. 38, §1 (1787) (Eng.).

Drawing on England's precedent, Jordan L. Mott, a successful American stove manufacturer, along with other industrialists and designers, petitioned Congress to enact design protection. Senator John Ruggles of Maine, former chair of the Senate's Committee on Patents and the Patent Office, presented Mott's petition. The bill proposed a "sole and exclusive copy-right" for the proprictor of any "new and original design" for specified articles of manufacture, including iron products and textiles. The copyright protection was for three years for metal designs and one year for articles other than metals.

Senator Ruggles's proposed bill passed the Senate Committee but was not enacted during that legislative session. Following Ruggles failed reelection, the design protection mantle was taken up by Patent Commissioner Henry Ellsworth, which resulted in an unfortunate drafting twist. See Peter S. Menell \& Ella Corren, Design Patent Law's Identity Crisis 36 Berkeley Tech. L.J. 1, 9-10 (2021). In his 1841 COMMISSIONER'S REPORT TO CONGRESS, Commissioner Ellsworth called upon Congress to establish a design protection regime under his authority at the Patent Office.
In 1842, Congress extended patent protection to "new and original designs for articles of manufacture." Although largely tracking the original copyright proposal, Commissioner Ellsworth's bill shifted the proposal to a patent rubric while retaining copyright language lifted from the British copyright law. The intent of the statute was to "give encouragement to the decorative arts." Gorham Mfg. Co. v. White, 81 U.S. (14 Wall.) 511, 524-25 (1871).

Beyond affording copyright-type protection for ornamental features of useful articles, design patents also became a form of protection for graphic trademarks. By the mid-18th century, commerce was rapidly expanding in the United States and Congress had not yet enacted federal trademark protection. Enterprising businesses began to use design patents as a means to obtain exclusive rights for distinctive labels for their products. Between 1842 and 1870, the Patent Office granted more than 200 graphic trademark design patents.

U.S. Design Patent No. 1163 (Nov. 1, 1859)

The use of design patents to protect trademarks rapidly declined with the passage of federal trademark protection in 1870.

Congress tweaked the duration and categories of design patent protection in 1801 and 1870. It afforded design patentees a disgorgement remedy in 1887. In 1902, Congress deleted the word "useful" from the design patent statute and replaced it with "ornamental." It also consolidated the classes of eligible works into a single class: "article of manufacture."

Congress augmented protection for designs through expansion of copyright law to protect sculpture and artistic designs in 1870. During the late 19th century, design patents focused on industrial designs and copyright focused on fine arts. That distinction gradually eroded. In 1954, the Supreme Court ruled that design patent protection and copyright protection are not mutually exclusive. See Mazer v. Stein, 347 U.S. 201, 218 (1954). We further explore the interplay of design patent protection and copyright protection for useful articles in Chapter IV(C)(2)(ii); and the interplay of design patent protection and trade dress protection in Chapter V(C)(1)(v).

The modern design patent provisions, codified in 35 U.S.C. §§171-73, carry over the 1887 and 1902 amendments without substantive change. The modern Patent Act allows an applicant to obtain a design patent for "any new, original and ornamental design for an article of manufacture" and provides that most provisions relating to utility patents for inventions also apply to design patents. §171. Design patents now receive a 15 -year patent term. ^13 A design may consist of surface ornamentation, configuration, or a combination of both.
