## 5. Assess the Witness

Although assessing the witness rarely is the exclusive purpose of a deposition, it always should be one of your goals. What is the witness's general demeanor? Nervous, calm, arrogant, confident, suspicious, aggressive, meek, emotional, dispassionate, phony, genuine? How does the witness react to and answer questions? Is the witness direct? Is the witness evasive? Does the witness try to obfuscate the truth? Does the witness ramble? Does the witness need to be drawn out? Does the witness answer your question?

This opportunity to assess witnesses can be invaluable. It will give you a sense of how a jury or judge may react to a witness. It will give you a sense in advance of how you may need to alter your style at trial for a particular witness. It will help inform your assessment of your case and where the appropriate settlement line lies.

# Assess the Witness 

Observe general demeanor > Observe how the witness answers questions > Observe reaction to specific questions > Use observations to prepare for trial > Use observations for settlement assessments In addition to assessing a witness's general reaction to questions, it is important to observe reactions to individual questions during the course of the deposition. Does a particular question have a different effect on a witness? Does the witness's body language change? Is a chatty witness suddenly giving short or abrupt answers? Is the witness evasive? These reactions provide important indications of areas that may need additional follow-through.

It is equally important to assess your own witness when you are defending a deposition. You can use this information for the same purposes described above, but additionally to help prepare the witness for trial. An important witness's demeanor can have an enormous effect on the outcome of a trial, and it can have an especially material effect if the witness is a party or related to a party (for example, an officer of a corporate defendant). Even when the facts are with you, the unlikeable demeanor of an important witness can affect not only the measure of damages, but also the question of liability itself. Keep in mind that some people appear to have a completely different personality when answering questions posed by an opposing attorney. Defending a deposition may be your only opportunity to observe how your own witnesses react to such questioning.
