
The process of obtaining a patent from the Patent Office is known as "prosecution." The time and effort required to prosecute a patent varies immensely from case to case. A few applications are reviewed quickly and issued within a year of the application date. Others languish in the PTO for years and, especially when several inventors claim they were the first to produce a particular invention, even decades. The "average" prosecution takes approximately three to four years. By paying an additional fee, applicants can "fast track" their patent applications, which reduces pendency to about 14 months. The typical application receives only 18 total hours of attention over the course of prosecution. See John R. Allison \& Mark A. Lemley, Who's Patenting What? An Empirical Exploration of Patent Prosecution, 53 VAND. L. REV. 2099 (2000). There are, however, significant variations in the length of time and quality of patent examination.

Prosecution begins with the filing of a patent application. Although an inventor or his or her lawyer or patent agent ^1 may file a temporary "placeholder" application, called a provisional application, it must be converted into a standard, full-blown "nonprovisional" application within one year if it is ever to issue as a patent. See §111(b). The basics of an application are: (1) the specification, including a summary of the invention and drawings in most cases; (2) one or more claims, at the end of the specification; (3) an oath, declaring the inventor(s) actually invented what is described in the specification; and (4) applicable filing fees.

New applications are assigned to one of the main examining groups, then to a specific "art unit" that specializes in the relevant technology, and ultimately to one of the roughly 9,000 patent examiners employed at the Patent Office. Applicants may file additional papers, such as an information disclosure statement (IDS), describing prior art known to the applicant at the time of filing, 37 C.F.R. §§1.97,1.98 (2002). Examiners usually make an initial review of the application, which includes a search of the prior art. The most common office action following this initial review is a rejection of most of the claims in the application, often on grounds of lack of novelty or obviousness. The examiner must state the reasons for each rejection, together with information and references to aid the applicant in judging the desirability of continuing prosecution or overcoming the rejection. §132. The examiner has the burden to show why an application should not issue as a patent. In response, the applicant can either contest (or "traverse," as patent lawyers say) the rejection or acquiesce in it.

Applications can be amended during prosecution. The most common reason for an amendment is to respond to a rejection or other office action. But applicants can also correct mistakes, add or change drawings, and even update the disclosure portion of the specification (though for amendments of this latter type, newly disclosed material does not enjoy the benefit of the initial filing date). Standard amendments are usually permitted up to the time when an examiner issues a final rejection, which may be as early as the second office action.

The label "final rejection" is a misnomer. An applicant can respond to a final rejection in a number of ways, most typically by a continuation or amendment after final rejection under 37 C.F.R. §1.116. (If the applicant feels continued prosecution would not be worthwhile, e.g., because there are clear disagreements with the examiner, he or she may file an appeal to the Patent Trial and Appeal Board (PTAB), an administrative tribunal within the PTO.) A continuation is basically a new version of the application, though continuations come in several flavors. Filing a continuation resets the examination process. A simple continuation application retains the benefit of the initial application's filing date; it therefore may serve much the same role as an amendment. A continuation-in-part ("CIP"), by contrast, adds new matter to the specification. This new matter does not retain the benefit of the earlier filing date, though any information carried over from the original filing does.

Applicants may employ a variation on the continuation theme when the examiner has decided to allow some claims but has issued a final rejection as to others. Typical prosecution strategy is to take the bird in the hand and fight over the contested claims separately. To achieve this, the applicant can file an amendment after final rejection canceling the rejected claims. This puts the remaining claims in condition for allowance. Meanwhile, the rejected claims may be carried over into a separate continuation application. Then the battle over these claims can be joined again; in the meantime, the acceptable claims will become enforceable as soon as the original, slimmed-down application is allowed to issue as a patent.

In addition to these various filings, applicants can communicate with patent examiners by phone or in person, through what is called an examiner interview. Any notes made during these communications become part of the prosecution history of the patent.

Prior to 2001, U.S. patent applications were not published. They were held in secrecy until the issue date. Long-pending applications were referred to as "submarine patents" for this reason: they traveled under the surface and could pop up to surprise a mature industry. These abuses, together with the goal of harmonizing U.S. practice with that of Japan and Europe, led to the publication of patent applications under the American Inventors Protection Act of 1999 ("AIPA"), §122(b). Under the AIPA, most applications are published eighteen months after their filing date. ^2 After publication but before the patent issues, the applicant has certain limited legal rights in the invention.

So long as the infringer has actual notice of the published patent application, and so long as the claims in the published application are "substantially identical" to the claims in the patent when issued, the applicant/patentee can recover a reasonable royalty from the infringer. Unlike an issued patent, rights in a published application cannot be enforced with an injunction. §154(~d).

Interested third parties-in particular, competitors of the applicant-sometimes (although not always) read their competitors' published applications. Significant third party participation is now permitted under various administrative procedures initiated in the America Invents Act (AIA) of 2011, which we discuss below.

Prosecution ends when the patent is granted or the application is abandoned. About three-fourths of all applications end up granted as patents, and about half the remainder are abandoned for business reasons, not because the PTO rejected them. See Mark A. Lemley \& Bhaven Sampat, Is the Patent Office a Rubber Stamp?, 58 EmORY L.J. 181 (2008). The optimal grant rate is a matter of great interest to scholars, though there is no easy way to know for sure exactly how many patent applications should issue as patents. See Michael D. Frakes and Melissa F. Wasserman, Does the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office Grant Too Many Bad Patents?: Evidence from a Quasi-Experiment, 67 StAN. L. REV. 613 (2015).

Prosecution can in a sense continue after a patent has issued. A patentee who comes to believe that her patent claims are either too broad or too narrow can seek a reissue of the patent, so long as the deficiency in the original patent is the result of a bona fide error or omission. Reissues to broaden the scope of claims must be initiated within two years of the original issuance, however.

Once the patent issues, the patent owner can enforce the patent in federal court. Many of the cases that we examine in this chapter are the result of these proceedings. Some of the cases, however, are appeals of patent rejections to the Federal Circuit. Three other forms of patent litigation deserve brief mention here.

- Post-Grant Review Proceeding: Beginning in 1980 and now much expanded as result of the America Invents Act of 2011, the Patent Office (through the PTAB) affords patentees and challengers with several post-grant proceedings to ensure that the patent was properly issued. These post-grant proceedings can run in parallel with patent litigation in federal court, although it is common for district judges to stay cases involving patents that are being reviewed by the PTAB. We will discuss these proceedings in the final section on patent reform.
- Declaratory Relief Action: Companies that reasonably fear being sued for patent infringement (for example, because the patentee has threatened them with suit) can file declaratory judgment actions seeking to establish that the patent at issue is invalid, or that their conduct does not infringe the patent. Such declaratory judgment actions are typically met with counterclaims charging infringement; these proceed much as normal patent infringement suits.
- Section 337 Investigation: The International Trade Commission has jurisdiction to block the importation of products into the United States if they infringe U.S. patents and to block the importation of products made abroad by processes that are patented in the United States. Patent owners can complain to the ITC, which will bring "Section 337" actions against likely infringers. These actions have their own set of procedural rules that operate parallel to district court actions for patent infringement. See generally PETER S. MENELL, ET AL., SECTION 337 PATENT INVESTIGATION MANAGEMENT GUIDE (2012).


^1 Lawyers or non-lawyers with the requisite technical training (science or engineering degree) must pass the Patent Bar Examination administered by the U.S. PTO in order to prosecute patents and participate as lead counsel in Patent Trial and Appeal Board proceedings.
^2 Applicants that only seek protection in the United States can sometimes keep their applications secret until issued. This maintains trade secret protection if their application never issues.