
Restatement (Third) of Agency §§ 2.01, 2.02, 2.03, 2.05, 3.03, 4.01, 4.03, 4.08
Traditional common law rules are designed to appropriately balance two important goals: (1) protection of a principal's property from the consequences of unauthorized action by an agent or apparent agent; and (2) protecting innocent third parties who have contracted with an agent or apparent agent. In assessing competing claims, the following common law concepts should be considered.

Actual authority. As detailed in Restatement (Third) of Agency § 2.01, "[a]n agent acts with actual authority when, at the time of taking action that has legal consequences for the principal, the agent reasonably believes, in accordance with the principal's manifestations to the agent, that the principal wishes the agent so to act." The principal's manifestations to the agent may be "express," as when the principal instructs the agent in writing or orally as to the scope of the agent's authority. Alternatively, the manifestation of consent may be "implied" from the conduct of the principal as reasonably interpreted by the agent. If actual authority exists, the principal is bound by the agent's authorized actions, even if the party with whom the agent deals is unaware that the agent has actual authority, and even if it would be unusual for an agent to have such authority.

Apparent authority. As detailed in Restatement (Third) of Agency § 2.02, apparent authority, sometimes called ostensible authority, "is the power held by an agent or other actor to affect a principal's legal relations with third parties when a third party reasonably believes the actor has authority to act on behalf of the principal and that belief is traceable to the principal's manifestations." A third party will be able to hold a principal responsible for acts by an agent or apparent agent on the basis of apparent authority only if the third party reasonably believed that the agent was authorized to act based on the actions, express or implied, that constitute communication of consent by the principal to the third party. Thus, if the third party knows that an agent is without actual authority, or if the manifestations made by the principal constitute an insufficient foundation for forming a reasonable belief that the agent is authorized, then the agent's unauthorized actions will not bind the principal. Importantly, apparent authority cannot be created solely by the words or actions of the agent or actor standing alone. The manifestation must be traceable to the principal's actions or conduct on which the third party reasonably relied.

Ratification occurs when a principal manifests their consent to a prior action that was neither actually nor apparently authorized. A principal may ratify a previously unauthorized action either expressly or impliedly, and by words or conduct, in circumstances where the principal is aware of the material facts concerning the matter being ratified. Ratification has the effect of treating a ratified action as if had been authorized by the principal at the time when the action was taken.

Estoppel occurs in two principal circumstances, and may be thought of as a special application of either the doctrine of apparent authority or the doctrine of ratification. First, a person may be estopped to deny the existence of an agency relationship in the following circumstance:

A person who has not made a manifestation that an actor has authority as an agent and who is not otherwise liable as a party to a transaction purportedly done by the actor on that person's account is subject to liability to a third party who justifiably is induced to make a detrimental change in position because the transaction is believed to be on the person's account, if (1) the person intentionally or carelessly caused such belief, or (2) having notice of such belief and that it might induce others to change their positions, the person did not take reasonable steps to notify them of the facts. ^17

Second, "[i]f a person makes a manifestation that the person has ratified another's act and the manifestation, as reasonably understood by a third party, induces the third party to make a detrimental change in position, the person may be estopped to deny the ratification."18

Which of these doctrines best explain the result in the principal case below? If a particular doctrine does not seem applicable in the facts of the case, what change in the facts would make that doctrine applicable?

# Ophthalmic Surgeons, Ltd. v. Paychex, Inc. <br> United States Court of Appeals, First Circuit, 2011 632 F.3d 31 

Torruella, Circuit Judge.
This case evidences the importance of careful contract drafting. In this breach of contract case, the appellee's liability depends primarily on whether one sentence in the contract is clear and unambiguous. Specifically, appellant, Ophthalmic Surgeons, Ltd. ("OSL"), alleges that Paychex, Inc. ("Paychex"), its provider of direct deposit payroll services, breached its obligations under a written agreement when, over a period 18. Id. §4.08.
of six years and without objection from appellant, it paid an OSL employee $233,159 more than her authorized annual salary of $33,280. For the reasons explained below, we affirm the district court's grant of summary judgment in favor of Paychex.

# I. Facts and Procedural History 

OSL, a Rhode Island corporation, is a medical practice specialized in ophthalmology. Dr. William J. Andreoni has worked at OSL as a physician and surgeon for twenty-six years. He has been part owner of OSL since 1986 and became the sole owner of the practice in 1993. During the mid-1980s, OSL began to grow. Therefore, the company sought to find a better way to administer its payroll. To this end, in 1989, OSL entered into an oral contract with Paychex for payroll processing services (the "1989 Agreement").

In 1994, OSL and Paychex entered into a written contract pursuant to which Paychex was to provide direct deposit payroll services (the "1994 Agreement"). The contract is governed by New York law. The relevant parts of the agreement state the following:
2. SERVICES TO BE PERFORMED. In addition to the services Paychex performs for the Client as a payroll client, client hereby employs Paychex to process direct deposit payroll in compliance with Automated Clearing House regulations. One business day prior to the client's payroll check date, Paychex is authorized to draw from Client's bank account as specified by Client, such amounts as are necessary to pay its employees. Such amounts are to be held in an account established by Paychex until check date when funds availability are [sic] due to the employee(s).
3. CLIENT'S RESPONSIBILITY. The Client agrees to accept the following obligations and responsibilities:
A. To execute all necessary documentation so that Paychex may withdraw funds from the Client's bank account to process direct deposit payroll.
B. To execute any other documents which may be required for Paychex to perform its responsibilities under this Agreement.
C. To have available in Client's bank account sufficient funds for Paychex to make the withdrawals provided for by this Agreement. . . .

The contract also contains a merger clause stating that " [t] he Client acknowledges that there have been no other representations or warranties made by Paychex to the Client which are not set forth in this Agreement."

Paychex's Rhode Island office handles approximately 7,000 clients. Paychex alleges that it performs its payroll processing services based on the information its clients provide. Each new client, through its designated payroll contact, provides Paychex with the relevant employee information including names, addresses, social security numbers and salary information. Paychex employees load this information onto a computer and use this information to process the client's payroll. Paychex submits reports and other documents to its clients on a regular basis. These reports include payroll journals and checks which are sent to the client prior to the date the checks will be paid to the employees. Because Paychex charges its clients per check processed, invoices to clients indicate how many paychecks were issued per pay period. Finally, Paychex provides quarterly reports, yearly reports and W-2 earnings statements to all clients.
In 1984, Carleen Connor began working for OSL as a technician who earned $7.00 per hour. She later became a licensed optician and the office manager, at which point she earned $16.00 per hour. It is undisputed that, from the mid-1990s until her termination in 2006, Connor handled payroll for OSL and was its office manager and designated payroll contact.

Paychex contacted Connor regularly to inquire about OSL's payroll. As Dr. Andreoni was aware, Connor would often call in more than one week's worth of payroll at a time. OSL alleges that during the years that Connor requested unearned paychecks, 2001 to 2006, its employees were paid on a weekly basis. In 2001, Connor began requesting that Paychex direct deposit into her bank account more money than required to pay her annual salary. During the pay periods when Connor requested more than her base pay, she requested that Paychex split her pay into two direct deposit payments. At some point, a Paychex representative told Connor that issuing her more than one payment for a given pay period was more expensive for OSL. Connor stated that she wanted to split her checks because a single larger check would result in a larger tax withholding. Paychex did not contact anyone at OSL to verify Connor's request.

It is undisputed that between 2001 and 2006, Connor directed Paychex to pay her, and Paychex did in fact pay her, a total of $233,159 more than her authorized annual salary. It is also undisputed that Paychex sent to OSL reports confirming all payments made. These reports were sent to Connor's attention and Dr. Andreoni alleges that he saw none of these reports because they were not sent directly to his attention. OSL discovered the unauthorized payments when another employee took over Connor's duties. . . .

# II. Discussion . . . . 

## C. THE DIRECT DEPOSIT AGREEMENT

The relevant language of the 1994 Agreement is "Paychex is authorized to draw from Client's bank account as specified by Client, such amounts as are necessary to pay its employees."

We find that the relevant contract language clearly and unambiguously establishes that it is the Client who has to specify the amounts that Paychex is authorized to withdraw from the Client's bank account. . . .

## D. CONNOR'S AUTHORITY

Although we have found that the contract creates no obligation for Paychex to verify the information that the payroll contact provides, we must now examine whether agency law creates such an obligation. OSL argues that the district court erred by ignoring a disputed issue of material fact regarding Connor's lack of apparent authority to "specify" the withdrawal of payments adding up to more than her authorized weekly salary. We find that OSL's argument is without merit.
A corporation must, by necessity, act through its agents. Kirschner v. KPMG LLP, 15 N.Y.3d 446, 465, 912 N.Y.S.2d 508, 938 N.E.2d 941 (2010) (discussing general principles of agency and corporations). It is undisputed that Connor was in fact authorized to handle payroll and was the designated payroll contact assigned to communicate with Paychex. Connor's actual authority, however, did not extend to embezzling funds by authorizing the issuance of paychecks in amounts in excess of her salary as this is not what OSL, the principal, instructed her to do. The question remains, however, as to whether Connor was cloaked with apparent authority ^6 such that Paychex could have reasonably relied upon her authority to issue additional paychecks in her name. Restatement (Third) of Agency §2.03cmt. a ("Apparent authority may survive the termination of actual authority or of an agency relationship."). ^7 OSL argues that Connor had no apparent authority where OSL, as principal, did not act in a way that gave the appearance that Connor had the authority to order the paychecks at issue here and that Paychex is therefore liable for making the unauthorized payments.

We recognize that " [t] he mere creation of an agency for some purpose does not automatically invest the agent with 'apparent authority' to bind the principal without limitation." Under New York law, apparent authority can only be created through "words or conduct of the principal, communicated to a third party" such that a third party can reasonably rely on the "appearance and belief that the agent possesses authority to enter into a transaction."

We find that Paychex's reliance was reasonable and that Connor had apparent authority because OSL put Connor in a position where it appeared that she had the power to authorize additional paychecks. Telenor Mobile Commc'ns AS v. Storm LLC, 584 F.3d 396, 411 (2d Cir.2009) ("Under New York law, an agent has apparent authority if 'a principal places [the] agent in a position where it appears that the agent has certain powers which he may or may not possess.'"). In her position as the designated payroll contact, Connor often called in more than one week's worth of payroll at a time without objection from OSL. Further, Dr. Andreoni admits that, after 1989, he had no further contact with Paychex. Even if we assume that, in 1989, the purported conversation between Dr. Andreoni, as agent of OSL, and a representative of Paychex occurred and that during that conversation, Dr. Andreoni informed Paychex that he wanted OSL employees to be paid weekly for fifty-two weeks each year, OSL's 7. We find it appropriate to cite the Restatement (Third) of Agency because the New York Court of Appeals recently relied on it when discussing traditional agency principles. We also note that New York courts have consistently relied on the Restatement (Second) of Agency.
argument fails. ^9 This conversation does not expressly convey a limitation on Connor's authority, especially where the conversation did not occur in connection with the formation of the 1994 Agreement. Further, it was reasonable for Paychex to assume its clients' needs might change and that the payroll contact would be authorized to convey such a change.

Paychex's reliance was also reasonable because of OSL's failure to object to the transactions that Connor authorized.

A principal's inaction creates apparent authority when it provides a basis for a third party reasonably to believe the principal intentionally acquiesces in the agent's representations or actions. . . . If the third party has observed prior interactions between the agent and the principal, the third party may reasonably believe that a subsequent act or representation by the agent is authorized because it conforms to the prior pattern observed by the third party. The belief is thus traceable to the principal's participation in the pattern and failure to inform the third party that no inferences about the agent's authority should be based upon it.

Restatement (Third) of Agency § 3.03cmt. b (internal citation omitted). ^10 In Minskoff v. American Express Travel Related Services. Co., Inc., 98 F.3d 703 (2d Cir. 1996), the Second Circuit found such inaction or omission sufficient to create apparent authority in an agent who was fraudulently using her employer's credit card. Id. at 709-10.

We find the Second Circuit's reasoning in Minskoff persuasive. Minskoff involved an office assistant, Susan Schrader Blumenfeld, who was explicitly responsible for the personal and business affairs of a company's president and CEO. Her duties included screening her employer's mail, reviewing credit card statements, and forwarding these statements to the company's bookkeepers for payment. Less than a year after she began working for the company, Blumenfeld fraudulently requested that American Express issue an additional credit card in her name for the company's corporate account. After discovering the fraud over one year later, the company filed a suit to recover the money the company had paid in connection with the unauthorized charges and sought a declaration that it was not liable for the outstanding balances. The court held that, pursuant to the Truth in Lending Act, Blumenfeld acted without actual, implied, or apparent authority when she forged the credit card applications. Id. at 708 (finding that there was no apparent authority to order an additional credit card where Congress intended that cases involving charges incurred 10. We find it reasonable to infer that the New York Court of Appeals would adopt the Restatement (Third) of Agency with respect to this issue because apparent authority based on a principal's inaction is similar to the principle of estoppel to deny apparent authority that the Second Circuit applied in Minskoff v. American Express Travel Related Services Co., Inc. 98 F.3d 703, 708 (2d Cir. 1996) (citing Restatement (Second) of Agency § 8b) (applying New York Law regarding apparent authority); see also Restatement (Third) of Agency Introduction (noting that this Restatement deals with situations where an agent is claimed to have acted without the principal's consent and acknowledging that the legal consequences of such appearances of agency are governed principally by apparent authority and to a lesser degree estoppel).
due to involuntary card transfers are unauthorized under the Truth in Lending Act). However, the court held that there was apparent authority for Blumenfeld's subsequent use of the fraudulently obtained credit card where the company failed to examine credit card and bank statements documenting the fraudulent charges. Id. at 709-10 ("A cardholder's failure to examine credit card statements that would reveal fraudulent use of the card constitutes a negligent omission that creates apparent authority for charges that would otherwise be considered unauthorized under the [Truth in Lending Act].").

We find Minskoff directly applicable to these circumstances. Like the company in Minskoff, OSL failed to examine the payroll reports that Paychex sent. That these reports were sent to Connor's attention is not dispositive where OSL, as principal, did not convey any instructions to Paychex that it should do otherwise. Further, OSL's failure to object to the "extraordinary" transactions would reasonably convey to a third party that it acquiesced in its agent's acts.

We find that by placing Connor in a position where it appeared that she had authority to order additional checks and by acquiescing to Connor's acts through its failure to examine the payroll reports, OSL created apparent authority in Connor such that Paychex reasonably relied on her authority to issue the additional paychecks. . . .

# PROBLEM 1-2 

Jake operates a wholesale brewery as a sole proprietor and employs Sharon as a sales representative. He orally instructs Sharon to offer volume discounts of up to 10 percent. Despite these instructions, Sharon, purporting to act as Jake's agent, enters into a contract with Sam for 10,000 cases of beer at a 15 percent discount. When Sharon presents the contract to Jake he reminds her of the 10 percent discount limit, but he agrees to fill the contract "since we have excess capacity right now." Several months later Sam approaches Sharon with a possible larger order but asks for a corresponding increase in the volume discount. Sharon, again purporting to act as Jake's agent, enters into a contract with Sam for 25,000 cases of beer at a 25 percent discount. In reliance on this contract, Sam, who is expanding his beer distributorship business, makes numerous contracts with his customers. Sharon fails to present the contract to Jake for several weeks. As she later testified, "I was waiting for him to be in a good mood." When Sharon finally presents the contract to Jake, he refuses to accept it. Sam, unable on short notice to find a suitable replacement source, sues Jake for damages. What result under the law of agency?

## PROBLEM 1-3

Beginning in 2010, Seattle-based artist Tonya Lawson began annually painting large-scale anti-war themed murals on the exterior of the Lenin Bar, a Seattle landmark which began business as a hangout for anti-war activists during the Vietnam War. The Lenin Bar management was enthusiastic about Lawson's project, and the process of creating the murals became a community celebration as many generations of military veterans and citizens from all walks of life came out to visit and cheer the artist on. Lawson completed her seventh and final mural in 2017. In addition to the Lenin Bar, four other establishments rented space in the same building ("the Arcade") which housed the Lenin Bar. Over the years, these establishments heralded the positive impact the murals had in attracting customers.

During the COVID-19 pandemic and related "stay-at-home" orders, the Lenin Bar suffered severe losses and went out of business in May 2021. At that time, Lawson asked the Lenin Bar management about the possibility of having the murals removed and donated to a local art museum. Lawson was told she would need to contact the Arcade's owner, Noel Oily, from whom the Lenin Bar has always leased its premises. Lawson had previously been unaware that the Lenin Bar premises were leased, and expressed concern as to how Oily might view matters. Lawson was told not to worry because "they have always been thrilled with the benefits that the murals provided in increasing the value of their investment."

However, two days later, painters commissioned by Noel Oily whitewashed the Lenin Bar's exterior, destroying the murals. Oily has plans to substantially remodel and expand the Arcade.

Tonya Lawson has retained the firm at which you are working to seek recovery for the destruction of her artworks. Your supervising attorney has concluded that Lawson may be able to state a viable claim for compensatory and punitive damages under the federal Visual Artists Rights Act due to the intentional destruction of the murals. The success of the claim will turn on one issue - under the common law of agency, did Noel Oily consent to the murals "being incorporated into or made a part of the building"?

Please write a short memorandum to your supervising attorney assessing how the common law of agency applies to this situation. Please also provide your advice as to what fact-finding might be worthwhile.


[^0]: 17. Restatement (Third) of Agency §2.05.
[^0]: 6. Under principles of agency, "[a]pparent authority may exist in the absence of authority in fact. . . ." Greene v. Hellman, 51 N.Y.2d 197, 433 N.Y.S.2d 75, 412 N.E.2d 1301, 1306 (1980). Actual authority refers to the manifestation that the principal makes to the agent. Id.; Restatement (Third) of Agency §2.01cmt. c ("Actual authority is a consequence of a principal's expressive conduct toward an agent, through which the principal manifests assent to be affected by the agent's action, and the agent's reasonable understanding of the principal's manifestation."). Apparent authority arises when the agent deals with third parties and refers to the manifestation that the principal makes to the third party. Greene, 433 N.Y.S.2d 75, 412 N.E.2d at 1306; Restatement (Third) of Agency §2.03cmt. c ("Apparent authority holds a principal accountable for the results of third-party beliefs about an actor's authority to act as an agent when the belief is reasonable and is traceable to a manifestation of the principal.").
[^0]: 9. OSL argues that these instructions limit Connor's authority such that she could only order 52 paychecks a year for each employee. As such, Paychex should have questioned Connor when she ordered more than 52 paychecks for herself.