
MBCA §§2.06,8.01,8.40,10.01-10.04,10.20
Delaware G.C.L. §§109,141 (a), 142, 242
One of the key characteristics of the corporation is the separation of share ownership and the management of corporate assets. As defined by state corporation codes, the archetypal corporation separates ownership and management functions into three specialized roles: directors, officers, and shareholders. Thus, three discrete bundles of rights are created, each having distinct powers and responsibilities that in a sole proprietorship would belong to one participant and in a general partnership would be shared equally by the partners. Essentially, shareholders provide capital and elect directors. Directors make major policy decisions. Officers execute those policies and provide day-to-day management. Of course, other constituents are important to the enterprise-for example, employees, creditors, suppliers, customers, and others - but as to these relationships corporate law defers to other areas of law, markets, and norms.

While the corporate form assumes separation of these functions, it does not require it, and this can be a source of confusion for one new to corporate law. The same individual may occupy more than one realm and simultaneously serve as a shareholder, director, and officer. This often occurs, for example, in a closely held corporation. Thus, the same legal form serves a spectrum of business firms, ranging from "mom and pop" enterprises, which make little use of the specialization provided in the legal form, to industrial giants requiring extremely specialized human and fiscal capital.

The corporate form provides a hierarchical structure for decision making that permits the enterprise to adapt easily to changed circumstances. By statute, all corporate powers are exercised by, or under the authority of, a centralized group-the board of directors. In addition, day-to-day management operations are delegated to the corporation's officers and other agents. No direct management role is left to the shareholders. Additionally, under state corporate law, the board acts as a unit via majority rule, as do voting shareholders. Thus, the corporate form favors adaptability and decisive but reasoned decision making, permitting minimal potential for individual participants to hold up collective action. On the other hand, as you will see throughout Chapters 4 through 9 , centralization of power and majority rule enable opportunistic behavior by the majority against minority investors.

# a. Directors 

The board of directors is the locus of all legal power and authority exercised by the corporation. See, e.g., Delaware G.C.L. §141 and MBCA §8.01. Collectively, directors determine basic corporate policies, appoint and monitor the corporate officers, and determine when and if dividends - periodic distributions of profit-are to be paid to shareholders. Directors are entitled to compensation for their services, but do not share in the firm's residual profits (except by virtue of any shares they may own in their personal capacity). As discussed above, directors' management power must be exercised collectively and by majority rule, and individual directors are not given general agency power to deal with outsiders.

Who are directors? In a closely held corporation, the major shareholders generally comprise the board of directors. In a publicly traded corporation, the size of the typical board ranges up to fifteen directors and much less tupically even larger. A development in the last quarter century is for most publicly held corporations to have a substantial majority of independent outside directors. The typical publicly traded corporation thus has one or more "inside" directors (generally the chief executive officer and her principal subordinate officers) and a balance of "outside" directors (who usually are employed full time as key executives of other corporations or retired from such positions, or are lawyers, accountants, or investment bankers, and therefore have the skill, integrity, and political insight to oversee the business and affairs of their corporations).

State corporation codes entrust management power to the directors acting collectively as a board, and do not identify or require specialized roles for particular directors. Nonetheless, inside and outside directors now perform de facto specialized roles, which have been shaped and reinforced by judicial rulings (see Chapter 4), the stock exchange rules mentioned above, and corporate norms. Inside directors (who are also key executives in the firm) are intimately familiar with the corporation's business, personnel, and markets. Outside directors are generally executives in other firms, or experts in corporate governance or finance. Normally, inside directors serve as an informational link between the corporation and the board of directors and develop business plans and policies for the corporation, subject only to the oversight and advice of the outside directors.

# b. Officers 

State corporation law norms contemplate that a corporation will have various officers responsible for day-to-day operation of the corporation's business affairs, although most statutes are remarkably silent about specifying duties for these officers. More recently, federal law, as opposed to the laws of the 50 states that are the source of corporate law mentioned above, has begun to play a role in the specification of officers' duties. For example, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 requires that the chief executive officer and the chief financial officer of a corporation certify the financial reports of the corporation that are made pursuant to disclosure rules of the federal securities laws. Like directors, officers receive compensation for services they perform, but do not share in the corporation's residual profit unless they also own shares.

The term "officer" connotes a corporate employee who ranks above other corporate employees in a corporation's management hierarchy. In older statutes, corporations were required to have a president, secretary, and treasurer. Modern statutes simply allow corporations to have the officers specified in the bylaws or determined by the board. See MBCA § 8.40 and Delaware G.C.L. § 142. The only remaining requirement in most codes is that the corporation designate an individual to be responsible for keeping and verifying corporate records, a duty often identified with the title "corporate secretary." A corporation's principal officer is often termed the chief executive officer, or "CEO," but that designation does not come from state corporation laws. In the run-up to the enactment of new federal legislation in 2002, then Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan was quoted as saying that CEOs are the "fulcrum" of corporate governance in American corporations today, a statement that is not obvious from the relationships defined in state corporation codes, but nevertheless undoubtedly true. Often the CEO serves as chair of the board of directors, a combination that has been controversial to the extent that it impedes the monitoring or oversight of the CEO by the board of directors.

## c. Shareholders

Corporate ownership interests are represented by shares-fungible ownership units - that typically entitle the holder to a pro rata share of the firm's profits and net assets when the corporation dissolves and winds up its business. Thus, the holders of those shares are the corporation's risk bearers and residual claimants. Shareholders collectively have the power to elect annually the corporation's directors and approve fundamental changes in the corporation's governing rules or structure. An individual shareholder, however, has very limited rights or power to participate directly in the management or operation of the corporation's business.

Shares are treated like other fungible property interests and are freely transferable by their owners. The purchaser of shares receives all voting power and other rights possessed by the selling shareholder. The unstated complement to this ability to freely transfer stock is the expectation that a shareholder will in fact recover the value of her investment via transfer to a third party, rather than forcing the corporation to provide liquidity by converting its assets to cash as would a dissolving partnership.

Normally, a shareholder has no obligation or liability to the corporation or its creditors beyond the amount she paid for the shares. This concept, known as "limited liability," allows a shareholder to risk only a predetermined amount of capital in each corporate investment, instead of potentially risking her entire wealth as would be the case if shareholders were personally liable for a corporation's debts. Likewise, directors and officers are not liable for the debts of the enterprise, although as will be seen in Chapter 10, they may incur liability if they commit torts or breach their duty to the corporation or its shareholders.

Limited liability also reduces the transaction costs in connection with the resale of shares, particularly when there are a large number of shareholders. If shareholders were personally liable for corporate debts, a potential purchaser would require information about the wealth and investment decisions of other shareholders in order to assess fully the risk that he would assume by becoming a shareholder. For example, consider two corporations-Corporation A and Corporation B-with identical businesses and assets. Corporation A's shareholders are collectively worth $1 billion, while Corporation B's shareholders are judgment-proof. Corporation B would present a much greater investment risk for a potential investor with assets that could be reached by creditors.

The governance role of shareholders may seem surprisingly limited given their financial interest in the entity. In this book we will see that shareholders do three things-vote, sell, and sue-but all in carefully measured doses. The statutory norms provide for annual and special shareholders' meetings and sometimes actions by written consent. Shareholders may use such a forum to elect (and possibly remove) directors and to vote on certain fundamental corporate actions such as mergers or amendments to the articles of incorporation, but only if such items have first been submitted by the directors acting as a gatekeeper. Additionally, shareholders can make some changes to the bylaws without prior approval by the directors. Despite shareholder power to vote, attend annual meetings, and (in some circumstances) call special meetings, even a majority of the shareholders may be unable to make business decisions for the corporation or require the directors to make changes in policies or procedures. Instead, as discussed above, corporate law statutory norms entrust management of corporate affairs to the directors.

# PROBLEM 3-1 

A central governance issue addressed by corporate law is how power and authority are allocated among the board of directors, officers, and shareholders. Take a brief tour through the MBCA or the Delaware General Corporation Law and begin your study of the statute by identifying the key sections that describe the role for each group and what the statute says is the power allocated to each group.
# d. The Business Judgment Rule 

Centralized management of the corporation by or under the authority of the board of directors is a key value-enhancing attribute of corporate form, particularly for publicly traded corporations. Correspondingly, it would be value reducing in the normal case to allow shareholders or judges either to make business decisions for the corporation or to second-guess business decisions made by the directors. Thus, an essential element of the directors' authority and power is the business judgment rule - a judicial presumption that the directors have acted in accordance with their fiduciary duties of care, loyalty, and good faith. If a shareholder challenges a decision by the board, the reviewing court will likely begin its analysis by applying the "business judgment rule" (reappearing later in this chapter, and in Chapters 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8). Put simply, courts and regulators prefer not to substitute their own judgment for that of the board of directors. Instead, they normally place on those challenging the propriety of directors' actions with the burden of rebutting the presumptions of the business judgment rule.
