
Where do firms come from? How are they created? In order to understand the modern corporation (which will be a primary focus of much of this book), you must understand how a basic business association is created and governed. You must also understand the fundamental, creative, value-maximizing role played by the corporate lawyer.

The corporate lawyer is a planner. At the birth of a firm, she will assist the prospective venture in the creation of an appropriate initial governance structure, and as the venture grows she will assist in adapting the organization as required by changed circumstances. The experienced corporate lawyer will understand and apply several concepts that will be introduced in the remainder of this section. First and foremost she will be a transaction-cost engineer. She will understand that human beings are cognitively limited, usually seek to promote their own self-interest, and have a propensity to act opportunistically in certain circumstances. Necessarily, then, the planner must understand when opportunism is likely, and suggest an organizational structure that will minimize the expected costs of future opportunistic behavior by employees, managers, or owners. However, to students steeped in law school's emphasis on litigation, we stress an important point that all experienced corporate lawyers keep in mind: owners and managers of firms have a strong, usually rational, preference for private ordering over court ordering. That is, when a firm encounters a need, or asserted need, to adapt to changed circumstances, it is usually more efficient, and often more consistent with the pre-dispute expectations of owners and managers, for those disputes to be resolved pursuant to the internal decision-making processes of the firm, rather than by resort to litigation and a judicially imposed solution. Accordingly, the corporate lawyer must understand how to select and modify governance structures to optimally minimize the use of litigation as a governance tool, while preserving the availability of litigation to deal with circumstances that cannot be appropriately governed solely by private ordering. Moreover, a value-maximizing corporate lawyer must understand the governance role of markets and intra-firm culture. To the extent these extra-legal institutions can be expected to give managers and employees strong incentives to voluntarily use their best efforts on behalf of the firm, the experienced corporate lawyer will recommend organizational structures that de-emphasize governance via court ordering.
