
The Patent and Trademark Office (PTO) reviews each patent application to see if it meets five requirements:

1. Patentable Subject Matter §101: The claimed invention fits within one of the four statutory categories ("process, machine, manufacture, or composition of matter") or "improvement thereof" and is not excluded by judicial doctrines barring patents on laws of nature, natural phenomena, and abstract ideas. Patents nonetheless cover inventive applications of these ineligible concepts.
2. Utility §101: The claimed invention must be useful in two respects: (1) credible utility-it must work for its intended purpose; and (2) specific and substantial utility-it must serve a particular practical purpose. Today, a patent will not be withheld even though the invention works only in an experimental setting and has no proven use in the field or factory. But it must serve some purpose. The possibility that it might be used later is not enough.
3. Novelty §102: The invention has not been preceded in identical form in the public "prior art" - the record of prior work in the field. Novelty is evaluated based on technical rules aimed at determining whether the claimed invention was in the prior art. U.S. patent law underwent significant reform of its novelty regime in 2013. For applications filed prior to March 16, 2013, U.S. patent law favors the first to invent so long as the invention was timely filed. For applications filed on or after March 16, 2013, U.S. patent favors the first applicant to have filed, subject to a grace period for prior publication.
4. Nonobviousness §103: It represents a nontrivial extension of what was known. This is the most important requirement; it has been called "the ultimate condition of patentability." The reason is that nonobviousness attempts to measure an even more abstract quality than novelty or utility: the technical accomplishment reflected in an invention. This requirement asks whether an invention is a big enough technical advance over the prior art. Even if an invention is new and useful, it will still not merit a patent if it represents merely a trivial step forward in the art.
5. Disclosure §112: The patent specification must convey to a person having ordinary skill in the art: (1) written description-the inventor gave a detailed account of the invention that demonstrated "possession" as of the time of filing the application; and (2) enablement-that the specification enable a person having ordinary skill in the art to make and use the invention. The disclosure requirements ensure that the patentee has fulfilled the social bargain underlying the patent grant-that those "skilled in the art" of the invention can read and understand the inventor's contribution, and that after the patent expires they will be able to make and use the invention themselves.