
Trade secret law has long been justified on two distinct grounds: property rights and unfair competition grounded in tort.

## i. Property (and Intellectual Property) Rights

Some jurists have conceptualized "intellectual property" as a species of the broader concept of "property." In addressing whether government disclosure of proprietary information constituted a taking under the Fifth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, theSupreme Court held that trade secrets constituted a form of property. See Ruckelshaus v. Monsanto Co., 467 U.S. 986, 1001-04 (1984). In holding that trade secrets were "property," the court reasoned in part that " [t] rade secrets have many of the characteristics of more tangible forms of property. A trade secret is assignable. A trade secret can form the res of a trust, and it passes to a trustee in bankruptcy." Id. at 1002-04.

Courts routinely characterize trade secrets as "property"2 and grant injunctive relief to prevent their disclosure. The nature of the "property" interest is, however, limited by the relational character of trade secrets. See Robert G. Bone, A New Look at Trade Secret Law: Doctrine in Search of Justification, 86 CAL. L. REV. 241, 251-60 (1998). As the court in Peabody v. Norfolk, 98 Mass. 452, 458 (1868), noted, if a party "invents or discovers and keeps secret a process of manufacture, whether a proper subject for a patent or not, he has not indeed an exclusive right to it as against the public, or against those who in good faith acquire knowledge of it, but he has property in it which a court of chancery will protect against one who, in violation of contract and breach of confidence, undertakes to apply it to his own use, or to disclose it to third persons." The court explained that courts of equity would intervene to "prevent such a breach of trust, when the injury would be irreparable and the remedy at law inadequate, is well established by authority." Thus, injunctions were available for breaches of trust "in the course of confidential employment."

Treatment of trade secrets as property rights vested in the trade secret "owner" is consistent with a view of trade secrets law as providing an additional incentive to innovate beyond that provided by patent law.

Professor Mark Lemley argues that trade secrets make sense not so much as real property, but as intellectual property-that is, as government policy designed to promote innovation and, ironically, to encourage efficient disclosure of secrets. Mark A. Lemley, The Surprising Virtues of Treating Trade Secrets as IP Rights, 61 StAN. L. REV. 311 (2008). The idea is that without a legal mechanism to protect secrets, companies will either forgo investment in new innovation or go to unnecessary efforts to hide those innovations-building fences, hiring less-qualified but trusted friends and family members instead of strangers, refusing to share the secret with business partners, and so on. Trade secret law, on this view, encourages both more innovation and more disclosure than we would get without it.

The Kewanee Oil opinion similarly recognized an IP-related goal of trade secret protection: encouragement of research and development:

Certainly the patent policy of encouraging invention is not disturbed by the existence of another form of incentive to invention. In this respect the two systems are not and never would be in conflict. . . .

Trade secret law will encourage invention in areas where patent law does not reach, and will prompt the independent innovator to proceed with the discovery and exploitation of his invention. Competition is fostered and the public is not deprived of the use of valuable, if not quite patentable, invention.
Kewanee Oil Co. v. Bicron Corp., 416 U.S. 470, 481-85 (1974). The Court recognized that even though a discovery may not be patentable, that does not destroy the value of the discovery to one who makes it, or advantage the competitor who by unfair means, or as the beneficiary of a broken faith, obtains the desired knowledge without himself paying the price in labor, money, or machines expended by the discoverer.
Id. at 482 (quoting A. O. Smith Corp. v. Petroleum Iron Works Co., 73 F.2d 531, 539 (6th Cir. 1934). The Court emphasized "the importance of trade secret protection to the subsidization of research and development and to increased economic efficiency within large companies through the dispersion of responsibilities for creative developments." See id. (citing Wexler v. Greenberg, 399 Pa. 569, 578-79, 160 A.2d 430, 434-435 (Penn. S. Ct. 1960)). This aligns with Justice Gray's declaration, in a seminal case, that "it is the policy of the law, for the advantage of the public, to encourage and protect invention and commercial enterprise." Peabody v. Norfolk, 98 Mass. at 458.

# ii. Tort Law 

An alternate explanation for much of trade secrets law is what might be described as a "duty-based" theory, or what Melvin Jager calls "the maintenance of commercial morality." 1 Melvin Jager, Trade Secrets Law ยง1.03 (2013), at 1-4. Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes questioned the "property" view of trade secrets in E.I. du Pont \& Co. v. Masland, 244 U.S. 100, 102 (1917), preferring to characterize these rights in relational terms.
[T]he word 'property' as applied to . . . trade secrets is an unanalyzed expression of certain secondary consequences of the primary fact that the law makes some rudimentary requirements of good faith. Whether the plaintiffs have any valuable secret or not, the defendant knows the facts, whatever they are, through a special confidence that he accepted. The property may be denied, but the confidence cannot be. Therefore, the starting point for the present matter is not property or due process of law, but that the defendant stood in confidential relations with the plaintiffs.
E.I. duPont de Nemours Powder Co. v. Masland, 244 U.S. 100, 102 (1917). ^3

Trade secret law has long been grounded in what has been termed "commercial morality." See Melvin F. Jager, Trade Secrets Law ยง1:3 (2013) ("[t]he AngloAmerican common law . . . began to develop protection for business secrets to enhance commercial morality and good-faith dealings in business"); Bone, 86 CAL. L. REV. at 244 ("Trade secret law is grounded in "relationally specific duties," such as "disloyal employees who use or disclose their employers' secrets in violation of a duty of confidence stemming from the employer-employee relationship").

The Eastman case illustrates the principle in action. See Eastman Co. v. Reichenbach, 20 N.Y.S. 110, 110, 116 (N.Y. Sup. Ct. 1892), aff'd sub nom. Eastman Kodak Co. v. Reighenbach, 29 N.Y.S. 1143 (N.Y. Gen. Term 1894). In the late nineteenth century, Eastman (Kodak), a pioneering developer of photographic technology, brought suit against former high-level employees who departed to start a competing business using secret information that they helped develop at Eastman. They had executed assignment agreements covering all inventions, discoveries, and improvements in photography that they might make, discover, or invent while at Eastman and agreed to maintain company secrets in strict confidence and not to disclose or make improper use of them. The court enjoined defendants' competing venture on the ground that [t]his is not legitimate competition, which it is always the policy of the law to foster and encourage, but it is contra bonos mores [against good morals], and constitutes a breach of trust which a court of law, and much less a court of equity, should not tolerate.
20 N.Y.S. at 116 .
This theme pervades trade secret law. As the Supreme Court recognized in Kewanee Oil Co. v. Bicron Corp., 416 U.S. 470 (1974), its landmark decision holding that federal patent law does not preempt state trade secret protection, "[t]he maintenance of standards of commercial ethics and the encouragement of invention are the broadly stated policies behind trade secret law. 'The necessity of good faith and honest faith dealing is the very life and spirit of the commercial world.'" Id. at 481-82 (1974) (quoting National Tube Co. v. Eastern Tube Co., 3 Ohio Cir. Ct. R., N.S., 459, 462 (1902), aff'd, 69 Ohio St. 560, 70 N.E. 1127 (1903)).

By contrast to the property view, the commercial morality concern aims to deter wrongful acts and is therefore sometimes described as a tort theory. Here the aim of trade secret law is to punish and prevent illicit behavior and even to uphold reasonable standards of commercial behavior. Under the tort theory trade secret protection is not explicitly about encouraging investments. It is plain, however, that one consequence of deterring wrongful behavior would be to encourage investment in trade secrets. Hence, despite their conceptual differences, the tort and property/incentive approaches to trade secrets may well push in the same direction.

One significant difference, though, is that the tort view focuses first and foremost on the question of infringement - did the defendant do something wrong? The property and IP views, by contrast, first ask whether there is a property right at all to be protected. Contracts While trade secrets protect against theft of a secret by third parties, many trade secret cases arise out of a "duty" explicitly stated in a contract, such as a technology license or an employment agreement. The tort-based breach of duty theory merges in those cases with a standard common law action for breach of contract. Cf. Robert G.
Bone, supra (questioning any distinct theoretical justification for trade secret law and arguing that contract and tort doctrines provide a proper foundation).

Trade secrets may be valuable because they give parties something to transact over. In so doing, they solve what has been called "Arrow's Information Paradox." People won't pay money for ideas unless they know what those ideas are, so they can decide if the idea is valuable. But without legal protection, disclosing the idea to a potential buyer would destroy its value. Parties sometimes sign "nondisclosure agreements" promising not to use information disclosed so it can be evaluated. Trade secret law can establish a right to protect that information against misuse once it is disclosed even in the absence of an express contract.


^2 See, e.g., Tabor v. Hoffman, 118 N.Y. 30, 23 N.E. 12 (1889) (holding that "independent of copyright or letters patent, an inventor or author has, by the common law, an exclusive property in his invention or composition, until by publication it becomes the property of the general public").
^3 The Monsanto Court distinguished Masland by observing that "Justice Holmes did not deny the existence of a property interest; he simply deemed determination of the existence of that interest irrelevant to the resolution of the case." Monsanto, 467 U.S. 1004 n. 9.