
## a. Introduction

It has long been "black letter" law that the business and affairs of the corporation shall be managed in a lawful manner. The Delaware Code limits the privilege of incorporation to "lawful businesses," and it is simply understood that "the corporation in the conduct of its business . . [i]s obliged, to the same extent as a natural person, to act within the boundaries set by law." ^10 Like the directors' duty to select and oversee the performance of the CEO, board oversight obligations with respect to legal compliance generated scant litigation and judicial commentary until late in the last millennium. That changed with the seminal opinion of Chancellor Allen in what is commonly referred to as the Caremark case. ^11

10. ALI, Principles of Corporate Governance: Analysis and Recommendations ยง 2.01 (1992).
11. In re Caremark Int'l, Inc. Deriv. Lit., 698 A.2d 959 (Del. Ch. 1996).
In assessing a proposed settlement in the Caremark case, Chancellor Allen commented on the nature of what has now become universally referred to as a "Caremark claim" - a claim seeking to recover damages for the director's alleged failure to monitor and prevent wrongful conduct by corporate employees that has resulted in significant harm to the corporation, in the form of criminal or civil penalties, reputational damage, settlement payments, and otherwise:

The complaint charges the director defendants with breach of their duty of attention or care in connection with the on-going operation of the corporation's business. The claim is that the directors allowed a situation to develop and continue which exposed the corporation to enormous legal liability and that in so doing they violated a duty to be active monitors of corporate performance. The complaint thus does not charge either director self-dealing or the more difficult loyalty-type problems arising from cases of suspect director motivation, such as entrenchment or sale of control contexts. The theory here advanced is possibly the most difficult theory in corporation law upon which a plaintiff might hope to win a judgment. ^12. . .

Most of the decisions that a corporation, acting through its human agents, makes are, of course, not the subject of director attention. Legally, the board itself will be required only to authorize the most significant corporate acts or transactions: mergers, changes in capital structure, fundamental changes in business, appointment and compensation of the CEO, etc. As the facts of this case graphically demonstrate, ordinary business decisions that are made by officers and employees deeper in the interior of the organization can, however, vitally affect the welfare of the corporation and its ability to achieve its various strategic and financial goals. If this case did not prove the point itself, recent business history would. Recall for example . . . the replacement of senior management of Kidder, Peabody following the discovery of large trading losses resulting from phantom trades by a highly compensated trader; or the extensive financial loss and reputational injury suffered by Prudential Insurance as a result its junior officers misrepresentations in connection with the distribution of limited partnership interests. Financial and organizational disasters such as these raise the question, what is the board's responsibility with respect to the organization and monitoring of the enterprise to assure that the corporation functions within the law to achieve its purposes? ^13

Although Chancellor Allen declined to impose liability on the facts of the case, his analysis of what it would take to achieve success in a Caremark claim became the standard against which plaintiffs styled lawsuits based on directors' alleged failure to monitor, and the standard by which courts in Delaware and elsewhere evaluated the sufficiency of facts pled or evidence produced. Thus, the so-called Caremark claim became an accepted part of corporate law jurisprudence and the backdrop against which corporate lawyers advised directors of their monitoring obligations.

In 2008, in Stone v. Ritter, the Delaware Supreme Court affirmed the Court of Chancery's dismissal of a "classic" Caremark claim, and used the occasion to adopt Chancellor Allen's analysis. The following excerpt from Stone v. Ritter sets out the black-letter law of a Caremark claim and how such claims fit in the larger universe of a director's fiduciary duty.
12. Id. at 967 .
13. Id. at 968-969.
# Stone v. Ritter <br> Supreme Court of Delaware, 2006 <br> 911 A.2d 362 

Holland, Justice . . .
The Court of Chancery characterized the allegations in the derivative complaint as a "classic Caremark claim," a claim that derives its name from In re Caremark Int'l Deriv. Litig. In Caremark, the Court of Chancery recognized that: "[g]enerally where a claim of directorial liability for corporate loss is predicated upon ignorance of liability creating activities within the corporation . . . only a sustained or systematic failure of the board to exercise oversight - such as an utter failure to attempt to assure a reasonable information and reporting system exists - will establish the lack of good faith that is a necessary condition to liability."

In this appeal, the plaintiffs acknowledge that the directors neither "knew [n]or should have known that violations of law were occurring," i.e., that there were no "red flags" before the directors. Nevertheless, the plaintiffs argue that the Court of Chancery erred by dismissing the derivative complaint which alleged that "the defendants had utterly failed to implement any sort of statutorily required monitoring, reporting or information controls that would have enabled them to learn of problems requiring their attention." . . .

Consistent with our opinion in In re Walt Disney Co. Deriv Litig[.], we hold that Caremark articulates the necessary conditions for assessing director oversight liability. We also conclude that the Caremark standard was properly applied to evaluate the derivative complaint in this case. Accordingly, the judgment of the Court of Chancery must be affirmed.

## FACTS

This derivative action is brought on AmSouth's behalf by William and Sandra Stone, who allege that they owned AmSouth common stock "at all relevant times." The nominal defendant, AmSouth, is a Delaware corporation with its principal executive offices in Birmingham, Alabama. During the relevant period, AmSouth's wholly-owned subsidiary, AmSouth Bank, operated about 600 commercial banking branches in six states throughout the southeastern United States and employed more than 11,600 people.

In 2004, AmSouth and AmSouth Bank paid $40 million in fines and $10 million in civil penalties to resolve government and regulatory investigations pertaining principally to the failure by bank employees to file "Suspicious Activity Reports" ("SARs"), as required by the federal Bank Secrecy Act ("BSA") and various anti-money-laundering ("AML") regulations. Those investigations were conducted by the United States Attorney's Office for the Southern District of Mississippi ("USAO"), the Federal Reserve, FinCEN and the Alabama Banking Department. No fines or penalties were imposed on AmSouth's directors, and no other regulatory action was taken against them.

The government investigations arose originally from an unlawful "Ponzi" scheme operated by Louis D. Hamric, II and Victor G. Nance. In August 2000, Hamric, then a licensed attorney, and Nance, then a registered investment advisor with Mutual of New York, contacted an AmSouth branch bank in Tennessee to arrange for custodial trust accounts to be created for "investors" in a "business venture." That venture (Hamric and Nance represented) involved the construction of medical clinics overseas. In reality, Nance had convinced more than forty of his clients to invest in promissory notes bearing high rates of return, by misrepresenting the nature and the risk of that investment. Relying on similar misrepresentations by Hamric and Nance, the AmSouth branch employees in Tennessee agreed to provide custodial accounts for the investors and to distribute monthly interest payments to each account upon receipt of a check from Hamric and instructions from Nance.

The Hamric-Nance scheme was discovered in March 2002, when the investors did not receive their monthly interest payments. Thereafter, Hamric and Nance became the subject of several civil actions brought by the defrauded investors in Tennessee and Mississippi (and in which AmSouth also was named as a defendant), and also the subject of a federal grand jury investigation in the Southern District of Mississippi. Hamric and Nance were indicted on federal money-laundering charges, and both pled guilty.

The authorities examined AmSouth's compliance with its reporting and other obligations under the BSA. On November 17, 2003, the USAO advised AmSouth that it was the subject of a criminal investigation. On October 12, 2004, AmSouth and the USAO entered into a Deferred Prosecution Agreement ("DPA") in which AmSouth agreed: first, to the filing by USAO of a one-count Information in the United States District Court for the Southern District of Mississippi, charging AmSouth with failing to file SARs; and second, to pay a $40 million fine. In conjunction with the DPA, the USAO issued a "Statement of Facts," which noted that although in 2000 "at least one" AmSouth employee suspected that Hamric was involved in a possibly illegal scheme, AmSouth failed to file SARs in a timely manner. In neither the Statement of Facts nor anywhere else did the USAO ascribe any blame to the Board or to any individual director.

On October 12, 2004, the Federal Reserve and the Alabama Banking Department concurrently issued a Cease and Desist Order against AmSouth, requiring it, for the first time, to improve its BSA/AML program. That Cease and Desist Order required AmSouth to (among other things) engage an independent consultant "to conduct a comprehensive review of the Bank's AML Compliance program and make recommendations, as appropriate, for new policies and procedures to be implemented by the Bank." KPMG Forensic Services ("KPMG") performed the role of independent consultant and issued its report on December 10, 2004 (the "KPMG Report").

Also on October 12, 2004, FinCEN and the Federal Reserve jointly assessed a $10 million civil penalty against AmSouth for operating an inadequate anti-moneylaundering program and for failing to file SARs. In connection with that assessment, FinCEN issued a written Assessment of Civil Money Penalty (the "Assessment"), which included detailed "determinations" regarding AmSouth's BSA compliance procedures. FinCEN found that "AmSouth violated the suspicious activity reporting requirements of the Bank Secrecy Act," and that "[s]ince April 24, 2002, AmSouth has been in violation of the anti-money-laundering program requirements of the Bank Secrecy Act." Among FinCEN's specific determinations were its conclusions that "AmSouth's [AML compliance] program lacked adequate board and management oversight," and that "reporting to management for the purposes of monitoring and oversight of compliance activities was materially deficient." AmSouth neither admitted nor denied FinCEN's determinations in this or any other forum.

Critical to this . . . argument is the fact that the directors' potential personal liability depends upon whether or not their conduct can be exculpated by the section 102 (b) (7) provision contained in the AmSouth certificate of incorporation. Such a provision can exculpate directors from monetary liability for a breach of the duty of care, but not for conduct that is not in good faith or a breach of the duty of loyalty. The standard for assessing a director's potential personal liability for failing to act in good faith in discharging his or her oversight responsibilities has evolved beginning with our decision in Graham v. Allis-Chalmers Manufacturing Company, ^15 through the Court of Chancery's Caremark decision to our most recent decision in Disney. ^16~A brief discussion of that evolution will help illuminate the standard that we adopt in this case.

# Graham and Caremark 

Graham was a derivative action brought against the directors of Allis-Chalmers for failure to prevent violations of federal anti-trust laws by Allis-Chalmers employees. There was no claim that the Allis-Chalmers directors knew of the employees' conduct that resulted in the corporation's liability. Rather, the plaintiffs claimed that the Allis-Chalmers directors should have known of the illegal conduct by the corporation's employees. In Graham, this Court held that "absent cause for suspicion there is no duty upon the directors to install and operate a corporate system of espionage to ferret out wrongdoing which they have no reason to suspect exists."

In Caremark, the Court of Chancery reassessed the applicability of our holding in Graham when called upon to approve a settlement of a derivative lawsuit brought against the directors of Caremark International, Inc. The plaintiffs claimed that the Caremark directors should have known that certain officers and employees of Caremark were involved in violations of the federal Anti-Referral Payments Law. That law prohibits health care providers from paying any form of remuneration to induce the referral of Medicare or Medicaid patients. The plaintiffs claimed that the Caremark directors breached their fiduciary duty for having "allowed a situation to develop and continue which exposed the corporation to enormous legal liability and that in so doing they violated a duty to be active monitors of corporate performance."

In evaluating whether to approve the proposed settlement agreement in Caremark, the Court of Chancery narrowly construed our holding in Graham "as standing for the proposition that, absent grounds to suspect deception, neither corporate boards nor senior officers can be charged with wrongdoing simply for assuming the integrity of employees and the honesty of their dealings on the company's behalf."

16. In re Walt Disney Co. Derivative Litig., 906 A.2d 27 (Del. 2006).
The Caremark court opined it would be a "mistake" to interpret this Court's decision in Graham to mean that:
corporate boards may satisfy their obligation to be reasonably informed concerning the corporation, without assuring themselves that information and reporting systems exist in the organization that are reasonably designed to provide to senior management and to the board itself timely, accurate information sufficient to allow management and the board, each within its scope, to reach informed judgments concerning both the corporation's compliance with law and its business performance.

To the contrary, the Caremark court stated, "it is important that the board exercise a good faith judgment that the corporation's information and reporting system is in concept and design adequate to assure the board that appropriate information will come to its attention in a timely manner as a matter of ordinary operations, so that it may satisfy its responsibility." The Caremark court recognized, however, that "the duty to act in good faith to be informed cannot be thought to require directors to possess detailed information about all aspects of the operation of the enterprise." The Court of Chancery then formulated the following standard for assessing the liability of directors where the directors are unaware of employee misconduct that results in the corporation being held liable:

Generally where a claim of directorial liability for corporate loss is predicated upon ignorance of liability creating activities within the corporation, as in Graham or in this case, . . . only a sustained or systematic failure of the board to exercise oversight - such as an utter failure to attempt to assure a reasonable information and reporting system exists-will establish the lack of good faith that is a necessary condition to liability.

# Caremark Standard Approved 

As evidenced by the language quoted above, the Caremark standard for so-called "oversight" liability draws heavily upon the concept of director failure to act in good faith. That is consistent with the definition(s) of bad faith recently approved by this Court in its recent Disney decision, where we held that a failure to act in good faith requires conduct that is qualitatively different from, and more culpable than, the conduct giving rise to a violation of the fiduciary duty of care (i.e., gross negligence). In Disney, we identified the following examples of conduct that would establish a failure to act in good faith:

A failure to act in good faith may be shown, for instance, where the fiduciary intentionally acts with a purpose other than that of advancing the best interests of the corporation, where the fiduciary acts with the intent to violate applicable positive law, or where the fiduciary intentionally fails to act in the face of a known duty to act, demonstrating a conscious disregard for his duties. There may be other examples of bad faith yet to be proven or alleged, but these three are the most salient.

The third of these examples describes, and is fully consistent with, the lack of good faith conduct that the Carrmark court held was a "necessary condition" for director oversight liability, i.e., "a sustained or systematic failure of the board to exercise oversight - such as an utter failure to attempt to assure a reasonable information and reporting system exists. . . ." Indeed, our opinion in Disney cited Caremark with approval for that proposition. Accordingly, the Court of Chancery applied the correct standard in assessing whether demand was excused in this case where failure to exercise oversight was the basis or theory of the plaintiffs' claim for relief.

It is important, in this context, to clarify a doctrinal issue that is critical to understanding fiduciary liability under Caremark as we construe that case. The phraseology used in Caremark and that we employ here-describing the lack of good faith as a "necessary condition to liability" - is deliberate. The purpose of that formulation is to communicate that a failure to act in good faith is not conduct that results, ipso facto, in the direct imposition of fiduciary liability. The failure to act in good faith may result in liability because the requirement to act in good faith "is a subsidiary element[,]" i.e., a condition, "of the fundamental duty of loyalty." It follows that because a showing of bad faith conduct, in the sense described in Disney and Caremark, is essential to establish director oversight liability, the fiduciary duty violated by that conduct is the duty of loyalty.

This view of a failure to act in good faith results in two additional doctrinal consequences. First, although good faith may be described colloquially as part of a "triad" of fiduciary duties that includes the duties of care and loyalty, the obligation to act in good faith does not establish an independent fiduciary duty that stands on the same footing as the duties of care and loyalty. Only the latter two duties, where violated, may directly result in liability, whereas a failure to act in good faith may do so, but indirectly. The second doctrinal consequence is that the fiduciary duty of loyalty is not limited to cases involving a financial or other cognizable fiduciary conflict of interest. It also encompasses cases where the fiduciary fails to act in good faith. As the Court of Chancery aptly put it in Guttman, "[a] director cannot act loyally towards the corporation unless she acts in the good faith belief that her actions are in the corporation's best interest." ^32

We hold that Caremark articulates the necessary conditions predicate for director oversight liability: (a) the directors utterly failed to implement any reporting or information system or controls; or (b) having implemented such a system or controls, consciously failed to monitor or oversee its operations thus disabling themselves from being informed of risks or problems requiring their attention. In either case, imposition of liability requires a showing that the directors knew that they were not discharging their fiduciary obligations. Where directors fail to act in the face of a known duty to act, thereby demonstrating a conscious disregard for their responsibilities, they breach their duty of loyalty by failing to discharge that fiduciary obligation in good faith. . . .

# REASONABLE REPORTING SYSTEM EXISTED 

The KPMG Report evaluated the various components of AmSouth's longstanding BSA/AML compliance program. The KPMG Report reflects that AmSouth's Board dedicated considerable resources to the BSA/AML compliance program and put into place numerous procedures and systems to attempt to ensure compliance. According to KPMG, the program's various components exhibited between a low and high degree of compliance with applicable laws and regulations.
32. Guttman v. Huang, 823 A.2d 492, 506 n. 34 (Del. Ch. 2003).
The KPMG Report describes the numerous AmSouth employees, departments and committees established by the Board to oversee AmSouth's compliance with the BSA and to report violations to management and the Board:


#### Abstract

BSA Officer. Since 1998, AmSouth has had a "BSA Officer" "responsible for all BSA/AML-related matters including employee training, general communications, CTR reporting and SAR reporting," and "presenting AML policy and program changes to the Board of Directors, the managers at the various lines of business, and participants in the annual training of security and audit personnel"[;]

BSA/AML Compliance Department. AmSouth has had for years a BSA/AML Compliance Department, headed by the BSA Officer and comprised of nineteen professionals, including a BSA/AML Compliance Manager and a Compliance Reporting Manager;

Corporate Security Department. AmSouth's Corporate Security Department has been at all relevant times responsible for the detection and reporting of suspicious activity as it relates to fraudulent activity, and William Burch, the head of Corporate Security, has been with AmSouth since 1998 and served in the U.S. Secret Service from 1969 to 1998; and Suspicious Activity Oversight Committee. Since 2001, the "Suspicious Activity Oversight Committee" and its predecessor, the "AML Committee," have actively overseen AmSouth's BSA/AML compliance program. The Suspicious Activity Oversight Committee's mission has for years been to "oversee the policy, procedure, and process issues affecting the Corporate Security and BSA/AML Compliance Programs, to ensure that an effective program exists at AmSouth to deter, detect, and report money laundering, suspicious activity and other fraudulent activity."

The KPMG Report reflects that the directors not only discharged their oversight responsibility to establish an information and reporting system, but also proved that the system was designed to permit the directors to periodically monitor compliance with BSA and AML regulations. For example, as KPMG noted in 2004, AmSouth's designated BSA Officer "has made annual high-level presentations to the Board of Directors in each of the last five years." Further, the Board's Audit and Community Responsibility Committee (the "Audit Committee") oversaw AmSouth's BSA/AML compliance program on a quarterly basis. The KPMG Report states that "the BSA Officer presents BSA/AML training to the Board of Directors annually," and the "Corporate Security training is also presented to the Board of Directors."

The KPMG Report shows that AmSouth's Board at various times enacted written policies and procedures designed to ensure compliance with the BSA and AML regulations. For example, the Board adopted an amended bank-wide "BSA/AML Policy" on July 17, 2003 - four months before AmSouth became aware that it was the target of a government investigation. That policy was produced to plaintiffs in response to their demand to inspect AmSouth's books and records pursuant to section 220 and is included in plaintiffs' appendix. Among other things, the July 17, 2003, BSA/AML Policy directs all AmSouth employees to immediately report suspicious transactions or activity to the BSA/AML Compliance Department or Corporate Security.

# COMPLAINT PROPERLY DISMISSED 

In this case, the adequacy of the plaintiffs' assertion that demand is excused depends on whether the complaint alleges facts sufficient to show that the defendant directors are potentially personally liable for the failure of non-director bank employees to file SARs. Delaware courts have recognized that "[m]ost of the decisions that a corporation, acting through its human agents, makes are, of course, not the subject of director attention." Consequently, a claim that directors are subject to personal liability for employee failures is "possibly the most difficult theory in corporation law upon which a plaintiff might hope to win a judgment."

For the plaintiffs' derivative complaint to withstand a motion to dismiss, "only a sustained or systematic failure of the board to exercise oversight - such as an utter failure to attempt to assure a reasonable information and reporting system exists - will establish the lack of good faith that is a necessary condition to liability." As the Caremark decision noted:

Such a test of liability-lack of good faith as evidenced by sustained or systematic failure of a director to exercise reasonable oversight - is quite high. But, a demanding test of liability in the oversight context is probably beneficial to corporate shareholders as a class, as it is in the board decision context, since it makes board service by qualified persons more likely, while continuing to act as a stimulus to good faith performance of duty by such directors.

The KPMG Report - which the plaintiffs explicitly incorporated by reference into their derivative complaint - refutes the assertion that the directors "never took the necessary steps . . . to ensure that a reasonable BSA compliance and reporting system existed." KPMG's findings reflect that the Board received and approved relevant policies and procedures, delegated to certain employees and departments the responsibility for filing SARs and monitoring compliance, and exercised oversight by relying on periodic reports from them. Although there ultimately may have been failures by employees to report deficiencies to the Board, there is no basis for an oversight claim seeking to hold the directors personally liable for such failures by the employees.

With the benefit of hindsight, the plaintiffs' complaint seeks to equate a bad outcome with bad faith. The lacuna in the plaintiffs' argument is a failure to recognize that the directors' good faith exercise of oversight responsibility may not invariably prevent employees from violating criminal laws, or from causing the corporation to incur significant financial liability, or both, as occurred in Graham, Caremark and this very case. In the absence of red flags, good faith in the context of oversight must be measured by the directors' actions "to assure a reasonable information and reporting system exists" and not by second-guessing after the occurrence of employee conduct that results in an unintended adverse outcome. Accordingly, we hold that the Court of Chancery properly applied Caremark and dismissed the plaintiffs' derivative complaint for failure to excuse demand by alleging particularized facts that created reason to doubt whether the directors had acted in good faith in exercising their oversight responsibilities. . . .

# b. The Essence of a Successful Caremark Claim 

The following opinion serves as a road map for filing a Caremark claim that will survive dismissal at the pleading stage, and as a warning shot for directors as to the seriousness with which they should take their monitoring obligations. It is also another opportunity to consider the role of law and judges. Judges, of course, determine the ultimate answers to the doctrinal and policy questions posed by litigants. However, judges are not completely neutral bystanders, especially in Delaware, given its role in making the law that governs most American public companies. Judges, some more than others, play a central role in the development of new doctrinal understandings. Sometimes, judges seem to be advocating for new doctrinal understandings as keenly as litigants' counsel. In the aftermath of Smith v. Van Gorkom, this judicial advocacy has been particularly present in cases dealing with the nature of the duty of good faith. Be alert as you read this case to the advocacy role being played by the court.

# Marchand v. Barnhill <br> Supreme Court of Delaware, 2019 <br> 212 A.3d 805 

Strine, Chief Justice:
Blue Bell Creameries USA, Inc., one of the country's largest ice cream manufacturers, suffered a listeria outbreak in early 2015, causing the company to recall all of its products, shut down production at all of its plants, and lay off over a third of its workforce. Blue Bell's failure to contain listeria's spread in its manufacturing plants caused listeria to be present in its products and had sad consequences. Three people died as a result of the listeria outbreak. Less consequentially, but nonetheless important for this litigation, stockholders also suffered losses because, after the operational shutdown, Blue Bell suffered a liquidity crisis that forced it to accept a dilutive private equity investment.

Based on these unfortunate events, a stockholder brought a derivative suit against two key executives and against Blue Bell's directors claiming breaches of the defendants' fiduciary duties. The complaint alleges that the executives-Paul Kruse, the President and CEO, and Greg Bridges, the Vice President of Operations-breached their duties of care and loyalty by knowingly disregarding contamination risks and failing to oversee the safety of Blue Bell's food-making operations, and that the directors breached their duty of loyalty under Caremark. . . .

## I. Background

## A. BLUE BELL'S HISTORY AND OPERATING ENVIRONMENT

## i. History

Founded in 1907 in Brenham, Texas, Blue Bell Creameries USA, Inc. ("Blue Bell"), a Delaware corporation, produces and distributes ice cream under the Blue Bell banner. ^14 By 1919, Blue Bell's predecessor was struggling financially. Blue Bell's board turned to E.F. Kruse, who took over the company that year and turned it around. Under his leadership, the company expanded and became profitable.
E.F. Kruse led the company until his unexpected death in 1951. Upon his death, his sons, Ed F. Kruse and Howard Kruse, took over the company's management. Rapid expansion continued under Ed and Howard's leadership. In 2004, Ed Kruse's son, Paul Kruse, took over management, becoming Blue Bell's President and CEO. Ten years later, in 2014, Paul Kruse also assumed the position of Chairman of the Board, taking the position from his retiring father.

# ii. The Regulated Nature of Blue Bell's Industry 

As a U.S. food manufacturer, Blue Bell operates in a heavily regulated industry. Under federal law, the Food and Drug Administration ("FDA") may set food quality standards, require food manufacturing facilities to register with the FDA, prohibit regulated manufacturers from placing adulterated food into interstate commerce, and hold companies liable if they place any adulterated foods into interstate commerce in violation of FDA rules. Blue Bell is "required to comply with regulations and establish controls to monitor for, avoid and remediate contamination and conditions that expose the Company and its products to the risk of contamination."

Specifically, FDA regulations require food manufacturers to conduct operations "with adequate sanitation principles" and, in line with that obligation, "must prepare ... and implement a written food safety plan." As part of a manufacturer's food safety plan, the manufacturer must include processes for conducting a hazard analysis that identifies possible food safety hazards, identifies and implements preventative controls to limit potential food hazards, implements process controls, implements sanitation controls, and monitors these preventative controls. Appropriate corporate officials must monitor these preventative controls.

Not only is Blue Bell subject to federal regulations, but it must also adhere to various state regulations. At the time of the listeria outbreak, Blue Bell operated in three states, and each had issued rules and regulations regarding the proper handling and production of food to ensure food safety.

## B. PLAINTIFF'S COMPLAINT

With that context out of the way, we briefly summarize the plaintiff's well-pled factual allegations and the reasonable inferences drawn from them.

The complaint starts by observing that, as a single-product food company, food safety is of obvious importance to Blue Bell. But despite the critical nature of food safety for Blue Bell's continued success, the complaint alleges that management turned a blind eye to red and yellow flags that were waved in front of it by regulators and its own tests, and the board - by failing to implement any system to monitor the company's food safety compliance programs-was unaware of any problems until it was too late.

## i. The Run-Up to the Listeria Outbreak

According to the complaint, Blue Bell's issues began to emerge in 2009. At that time, Paul Kruse, Blue Bell's President and CEO, and his cousin, Paul Bridges, were responsible for the three plants Blue Bell operated in Texas, Oklahoma, and Alabama. The complaint alleges that, despite being responsible for overseeing plant operations, Paul Kruse and Bridges failed to respond to signs of trouble in the run up to the listeria outbreak. From 2009 to 2013, several regulators found troubling compliance failures at Blue Bell's facilities:

- In July 2009, the FDA's inspection of the Texas facility revealed "two instances of condensation, one from a pipe carrying liquid caramel [that] was dripping into three gallon cartons waiting to be filled, and one dripping into ice cream sandwich wafers." The FDA reported these observations directly to Paul Kruse, who assured the FDA that "condensation is treated by Blue Bell as a serious concern."
- In March 2010, the Alabama Department of Health inspected the Alabama plant and "found equipment left on the floor and a ceiling in disrepair in the container forming room."
- Two months later, in May 2010, the FDA returned to the Texas plant "and observed ten violations that were cited to Paul Kruse including, again, a condensation drip." While the condensation drip persisted from the FDA's last inspection of the Texas plant, the FDA also observed "ripped and open containers of ingredients, inconsistent hand-washing and glove use and a spider and its web near the ingredients."
- In July 2011, an inspection by "the Alabama Department of Public Health cited drips from a ceiling unit and pipelines, standing water, open tank lids and unprotected measuring cups."
- Nine months later, in March 2012, an inspection of the Oklahoma facility revealed the plant's " '[f]ailure to manufacture foods under conditions and controls necessary to minimize contamination' and '[f]ailure to handle and maintain equipment, containers and utensils used to hold food in [sic] manner that protects against contamination.'"
- That same month, in March 2012, "[t]he Alabama Department of Public Health required five changes" to the Alabama facility, "including instructions to clean various rooms and items, make repairs and [sic] after fruit processing to prevent contamination." A year later, "in March 2013, the Alabama Department of Public Health again ordered cleaning and repairs and observed an uncapped fruit tank." The Alabama Department of Public Health made similar observations in a July 2014 inspection.

Regulatory inspections during this time were not the only signal that Blue Bell faced potential health safety risks. In 2013, "the Company had five positive tests" for listeria, and in January 2014, "the Company received a presumptive positive listeria result reports from the third party laboratory for the [Oklahoma] facility on January 20, 2014 and the samples reported positive for a second time on January 24, 2014."

Although management had received reports about listeria's growing presence in Blue Bell's plants, the complaint alleges that the board never received any information about listeria or more generally about food safety issues. Minutes from the board's January 29, 2014 meeting "reflect no report or discussion of the increasingly frequent positive tests that had been occurring since 2013 or the third party lab reports received in the preceding two weeks." Board meeting minutes from February and March likewise reflect no board-level discussion of listeria. ^42

During the rest of 2014, Blue Bell's problems accelerated, but the board remained uninformed about Blue Bell's problems. In April, "[t]he Company received further positive listeria lab tests regarding [the Oklahoma facility]." That same month, the company had three "positive coliform tests far above the known legal regulator limits." Yet, minutes from the April board meeting reflected no discussion of listeria. Instead, the minutes note only that the Oklahoma and Alabama facilities' "plant operations were discussed briefly" and that Bridges also discussed "a good report from the TCEQ [Texas Commission on Environmental Quality]."

Over the course of 2014, Blue Bell received ten positive tests for listeria. According to the complaint, these positive tests "included repeated positive results from the Company's third party laboratory in 2014, on consecutive samples, evidencing the inadequacy of the Company's remedial methods to eliminate the contamination."

Despite management's knowledge of the growing problem, the complaint alleges that this information never made its way to the board, and the board continued to be uninformed about (and thus unaware of) the problem. Minutes from the board's 2014 meetings are bereft of reports on the listeria issues. Only during the September meeting is sanitation discussed, when Bridges informed the board that " [t] he recent Silliker audit [Blue Bell's third-party auditor for sanitation issues in 2014] went well." This lone reference to a third-party audit is the only instance, until the listeria outbreak forced the recall of Blue Bell's products, of any board-level discussion regarding food safety.

At this stage of the case, we are bound to draw all fair inferences in the plaintiff's favor from the well-pled facts. Based on this chronology of events, the plaintiffs have fairly pled that:

- Blue Bell had no board committee charged with monitoring food safety;
- Blue Bell's full board did not have a process where a portion of the board's meetings each year, for example either quarterly or biannually, were specifically devoted to food safety compliance; and - The Blue Bell board did not have a protocol requiring or have any expectation that management would deliver key food safety compliance reports or summaries of these reports to the board on a consistent and mandatory basis. In fact, it is inferable that there was no expectation of reporting to the board of any kind.

In short, the complaint pleads that the Blue Bell board had made no effort at all to implement a board-level system of mandatory reporting of any kind.

# ii. The Listeria Outbreak and the Board's Response 

Blue Bell's listeria problem spread in 2015. Starting in January 2015, one of Blue Bell's product tests had positive coliform levels above legal limits. The same result appeared in February 2015. And by this point, the problem spread to Blue Bell's products and spiraled out of control.

On February 13, 2015, "Blue Bell received notification that the Texas Department of State Health Services also had positive tests for listeria in Blue Bell samples." The Texas Department of State Health Services was alerted to these positive tests by the South Carolina Health Department. Company swabs at the Texas facility on February 19 and 21, 2015 tested positive for listeria. Yet despite these reports to management, Blue Bell's board was not informed by management about the severe problem. The board met on February 19, 2015, following Blue Bell's annual stockholders meeting, but there was no listeria discussion.

Four days later, Blue Bell initiated a limited recall. Two days after that, Blue Bell's board met, and Bridges reported that "[t]he FDA is working with Texas health inspectors regarding the Company's recent recall of products. More information is developing and should be known within the next days or weeks." Despite two years of evidence that listeria was a growing problem for Blue Bell, this is the first time the board discussed the issue, according to the complaint and the incorporated board minutes. Instead of holding more frequent emergency board meetings to receive constant updates on the troubling fact that life-threatening bacteria was found in its products, Blue Bell's board left the company's response to management.

And the problem got worse, with awful effects. "In early March 2015, health authorities reported that they suspected a connection between human listeria infections in Kansas and products made by Blue Bell's [Texas] facility." The outbreak in Kansas matched a listeria strain found in Blue Bell's products in South Carolina. And by March 23, 2015, Blue Bell was forced to recall more products. Two days later, Blue Bell's board met and adopted a resolution "express[ing] support for Blue Bell's CEO, management, and employees and encourag[ing] them to ensure that everything Blue Bell manufacture[s] and distributes is a wholesome and good testing [sic] product that our consumers deserve and expect."

Blue Bell expanded the recall two weeks later, and less than a month later, on April 20, 2015, Blue Bell "instituted a recall of all products." By this point, the Center[s] for Disease Control[ ] and Prevention ("CDC") had begun an investigation and discovered that the source of the listeria outbreak in Kansas was caused by Blue Bell's Texas and Oklahoma plants. Ultimately, five adults in Kansas and three adults in Texas were sickened by Blue Bell's products; three of the five Kansas adults died because of complications due to listeria infection. The CDC issued a recall to grocers and retailers, alerting them to the contamination and warning them against selling the products.

After Blue Bell's full product recall, the FDA inspected each of the company's three plants. Each was found to have major deficiencies. In the Texas plant, the FDA found a "failure to manufacture foods under conditions and controls necessary to minimize the potential for growth of microorganisms," inadequate cleaning and sanitizing procedures, "failure to maintain buildings in repair sufficient to prevent food from coming [sic] adulterated," and improper construction of the building that failed to prevent condensation from occurring. Likewise, at the Oklahoma facility, "[t]he FDA found that the Company had been receiving increasingly frequent positive listeria tests at [the Oklahoma facility] for over three years," failed "to manufacture and package foods under conditions and controls necessary to minimize the potential growth of microorganisms and contamination," failed to perform testing to ferret out microbial growth, implemented inadequate cleaning and sterilization procedures, failed to provide running water at an appropriate temperature to sanitize equipment, and failed to store food in clean and sanitized portable equipment.

Although the Alabama facility fared better, the FDA still found contamination and several issues, including the "failure to perform microbial testing where necessary to identify possible food contamination," "failure to maintain food contact surfaces to protect food from contamination by any source," and inadequate construction of the facility such that condensation was likely. Most of these findings, the complaint alleges, are unsurprising because similar deficiencies were found by the FDA and state regulators in the run up to the listeria outbreak, yet according to the FDA's inspection after the fact, it appeared that neither management nor the board made progress on remedying these deficiencies.

After the fact, various news outlets interviewed former Blue Bell employees who "claimed that Company management ignored complaints about factory conditions in [the Texas facility]." One former employee "reported [that] spilled ice cream was left to pool on the floor, 'creating an environment where bacteria could flourish.'" Another former employee described being "instructed to pour ice cream and fruit that dripped off his machine into mix to be used later."

# iii. The Aftermath of the Listeria Outbreak 

With its operations shuttered, Blue Bell faced a liquidity crisis. Blue Bell initially sought a more traditional credit facility to bridge its liquidity, but after Blue Bell director W.J. Rankin informed his brother-in-law, Bill Reimann, about Blue Bell's liquidity crunch, Blue Bell ended up striking a deal with Moo Partners, a fund controlled by Sid Bass and affiliated with Reimann. Moo Partners provided Blue Bell with a $125 million credit facility and purchased a $100 million warrant to acquire 42% of Blue Bell at $50,000 per share. As part of Moo Partners's investment conditions, Blue Bell also amended its certificate of incorporation to grant Moo the right to appoint one member of Blue Bell's board who would be entitled to one-third of the board's voting power (or five votes based on a then-10-member board).

After investing in Blue Bell, Moo named Reimann to Blue Bell's board, expanding the board to 11 members with Reimann possessing five votes. In February 2016, Reimann suggested that the board separate the roles of CEO and Chairman (both held by Paul Kruse). The board voted to follow Reimann's recommendation at its February 18th meeting, but after Paul Kruse disagreed with the recommendation and threatened to resign as President and CEO if the split occurred, the board held another vote in which all members, except Reimann and Rankin, voted to restore the position of CEO and Chairman of the board. . . .
# C. THE COURT OF CHANCERY DISMISSES THE CASE . . . 

Rejecting the plaintiff's Caremark claim, the Vice Chancellor started by observing that "[d]espite the far-reaching regulatory schemes that governed Blue Bell's operations at the time of the listeria contamination, the Complaint contains no allegations that Blue Bell failed to implement the monitoring and reporting systems required by the FDCA [Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act], FDA regulations or state statutes (or that it was ever cited for such a failure)." In fact, the Court of Chancery concluded that "documents incorporated by reference in the Complaint reveal that Blue Bell distributed a sanitation manual with standard operating and reporting procedures, and promulgated written procedures for processing and reporting consumer complaints." And at the board level, the Vice Chancellor noted that "[b]oth Bridges and Paul Kruse . . . provided regular reports regarding Blue Bell operations to the . . . Board," including reports about audits of Blue Bell's facilities.

Based on Blue Bell's compliance with FDA regulations, ongoing third-party monitoring for contamination, and consistent reporting by senior management to Blue Bell's board on operations, the Court of Chancery concluded that there was a monitoring system in place. At bottom, the Court of Chancery opined that "[w]hat Plaintiff really attempts to challenge is not the existence of monitoring and reporting controls, but the effectiveness of monitoring and reporting controls in particular instances." That, the Court of Chancery held, does not state a Caremark claim. . . .

## II. Analysis...

## B. THE CAREMARK CLAIM

The plaintiff also challenges the Court of Chancery's dismissal of his Caremark claim. Although Caremark claims are difficult to plead and ultimately to prove out, we nonetheless disagree with the Court of Chancery's decision to dismiss the plaintiff's claim against the Blue Bell board.

Under Caremark and Stone v. Ritter a director must make a good faith effort to oversee the company's operations. ^100 Failing to make that good faith effort breaches the duty of loyalty and can expose a director to liability. In other words, for a plaintiff to prevail on a Caremark claim, the plaintiff must show that a fiduciary acted in bad faith - "the state of mind traditionally used to define the mindset of a disloyal director."

Bad faith is established, under Caremark, when "the directors [completely] fail[ ] to implement any reporting or information system or controls[,] or . . . having implemented such a system or controls, consciously fail[ ] to monitor or oversee its operations thus disabling themselves from being informed of risks or problems requiring their attention." In short, to satisfy their duty of loyalty, directors must make a good faith effort to implement an oversight system and then monitor it.

As with any other disinterested business judgment, directors have great discretion to design context- and industry-specific approaches tailored to their companies' businesses and resources. But Caremark does have a bottom-line requirement that is important: the board must make a good faith effort-i.e., try-to put in place a reasonable board-level system of monitoring and reporting. Thus, our case law gives deference to boards and has dismissed Caremark cases even when illegal or harmful company activities escaped detection, when the plaintiffs have been unable to plead that the board failed to make the required good faith effort to put a reasonable compliance and reporting system in place.

For that reason, our focus here is on the key issue of whether the plaintiff has pled facts from which we can infer that Blue Bell's board made no effort to put in place a board-level compliance system. That is, we are not examining the effectiveness of a board-level compliance and reporting system after the fact. Rather, we are focusing on whether the complaint pleads facts supporting a reasonable inference that the board did not undertake good faith efforts to put a board-level system of monitoring and reporting in place.

Under Caremark, a director may be held liable if she acts in bad faith in the sense that she made no good faith effort to ensure that the company had in place any "system of controls." Here, the plaintiff did as our law encourages and sought out books and records about the extent of board-level compliance efforts at Blue Bell regarding what has to be one of the most central issues at the company: whether it is ensuring that the only product it makes-ice cream-is safe to eat. Using these books and records, the complaint fairly alleges that before the listeria outbreak engulfed the company:

- no board committee that addressed food safety existed;
- no regular process or protocols that required management to keep the board apprised of food safety compliance practices, risks, or reports existed;
- no schedule for the board to consider on a regular basis, such as quarterly or biannually, any key food safety risks existed;
- during a key period leading up to the deaths of three customers, management received reports that contained what could be considered red, or at least yellow, flags, and the board minutes of the relevant period revealed no evidence that these were disclosed to the board;
- the board was given certain favorable information about food safety by management, but was not given important reports that presented a much different picture; and - the board meetings are devoid of any suggestion that there was any regular discussion of food safety issues.

And the complaint goes on to allege that after the listeria outbreak, the FDA discovered a number of systematic deficiencies in all of Blue Bell's plants - such as plants being constructed "in such a manner as to [not] prevent drip and condensate from contaminating food, food-contact surfaces, and food-packing material" - that might have been rectified had any reasonable reporting system that required management to relay food safety information to the board on an ongoing basis been in place.
In sum, the complaint supports an inference that no system of board-level compliance monitoring and reporting existed at Blue Bell. Although Caremark is a tough standard for plaintiffs to meet, the plaintiff has met it here. When a plaintiff can plead an inference that a board has undertaken no efforts to make sure it is informed of a compliance issue intrinsically critical to the company's business operation, then that supports an inference that the board has not made the good faith effort that Caremark requires.

In defending this case, the directors largely point out that by law Blue Bell had to meet FDA and state regulatory requirements for food safety, and that the company had in place certain manuals for employees regarding safety practices and commissioned audits from time to time. In the same vein, the directors emphasize that the government regularly inspected Blue Bell's facilities, and Blue Bell management got the results.

But the fact that Blue Bell nominally complied with FDA regulations does not imply that the board implemented a system to monitor food safety at the board level. Indeed, these types of routine regulatory requirements, although important, are not typically directed at the board. At best, Blue Bell's compliance with these requirements shows only that management was following, in a nominal way, certain standard requirements of state and federal law. It does not rationally suggest that the board implemented a reporting system to monitor food safety or Blue Bell's operational performance. The mundane reality that Blue Bell is in a highly regulated industry and complied with some of the applicable regulations does not foreclose any plead-ing-stage inference that the directors' lack of attentiveness rose to the level of bad faith indifference required to state a Caremark claim.

In answering the plaintiff's argument, the Blue Bell directors also stress that management regularly reported to them on "operational issues." This response is telling. In decisions dismissing Caremark, the plaintiffs usually lose because they must concede the existence of board-level systems of monitoring and oversight such as a relevant committee, a regular protocol requiring board-level reports about the relevant risks, or the board's use of third-party monitors, auditors, or consultants. ^112 For example, in Stone v. Ritter, although the company paid $50 million in fines related "to the failure by bank employees" to comply with "the federal Bank Secrecy Act," the"[b]oard dedicated considerable resources to the [Bank Secrecy Act] compliance program and put into place numerous procedures and systems to attempt to ensure compliance." Accordingly, this Court affirmed the Court of Chancery's dismissal of a Caremark claim. Here, the Blue Bell directors just argue that because Blue Bell management, in its discretion, discussed general operations with the board, a Caremark claim is not stated.

But if that were the case, then Caremark would be a chimera. At every board meeting of any company, it is likely that management will touch on some operational issue. Although Caremark may not require as much as some commentators wish, it does require that a board make a good faith effort to put in place a reasonable system of monitoring and reporting about the corporation's central compliance risks. In Blue Bell's case, food safety was essential and mission critical. The complaint pled facts supporting a fair inference that no board-level system of monitoring or reporting on food safety existed.

If Caremark means anything, it is that a corporate board must make a good faith effort to exercise its duty of care. A failure to make that effort constitutes a breach of the duty of loyalty. Where, as here, a plaintiff has followed our admonishment to seek out relevant books and records and then uses those books and records to plead facts supporting a fair inference that no reasonable compliance system and protocols were established as to the obviously most central consumer safety and legal compliance issue facing the company, that the board's lack of efforts resulted in it not receiving official notices of food safety deficiencies for several years, and that, as a failure to take remedial action, the company exposed consumers to listeria-infected ice cream, resulting in the death and injury of company customers, the plaintiff has met his onerous pleading burden and is entitled to discovery to prove out his claim.

# III. CONCLUSION 

We therefore reverse the Court of Chancery's decision and remand for proceedings consistent with this opinion.

## NOTES AND QUESTIONS

1. Board-approved and -monitored law compliance programs became a standard part of the corporate governance landscape in the early 1990s in response to the federal sentencing guidelines for organizations, a development cogently described by Professor John S. Baker:

Corporate self-policing or compliance plans have become pervasive since the 1991 adoption of the guidelines for sentencing of organizations. The Sentencing Guidelines have spawned a "compliance" industry of lawyers, accountants, consultants, and corporate vice presidents, who draft codes of corporate conduct and provide employee training in both the codes and appropriate practices-which, in turn, they audit for compliance. When violations occur, theoretically the system of compliance should detect them and the corporation should "voluntarily" disclose the wrongdoing to federal law enforcement. Although the Sentencing Guidelines do not offer much guidance, the voluntarily adopted codes of conduct are supposed to be "effective program[s]," which seems to imply that their operation will result in voluntary disclosure of wrongdoing.
According to the Sentencing Commission, the Guidelines adopt a "carrot and stick" approach. The "carrot" of a potentially lesser sentence upon future conviction is supposedly the incentive for a corporation to adopt a code of conduct and voluntarily disclose wrongdoing. If a convicted corporation has not pursued these incentives, the "stick" will be the imposition of higher penalties.

John S. Baker Jr., Reforming Corporations Through Threats of Federal Prosecution, 89 Cornell L. Rev. 310, 316-317 (2005).
2. While the board's heightened role in ensuring law compliance is of relatively recent origin, the board's need to ensure adequate financial accounting and reporting systems is long-standing. Consistent with that core board responsibility, audit committees have been a standard part of the governance structure of most publicly held corporations since at least the 1970s. In 1977, the New York Stock Exchange adopted new standards requiring all listed companies to have an audit committee charged with responsibility for assisting the board of directors in its oversight of the company's financial accounting and reports of the results of operations filed with the SEC or otherwise publicized. It was estimated that 90 percent of America's largest public corporations had audit committees as a standard part of their governance structure prior to the 1977 rule change. Joel Seligman, A Modest Revolution in Corporate Governance, 80 Notre Dame L. Rev. 1159, 1167 (2005).
3. The importance of the Caremark doctrine was magnified manyfold after the spectacular accounting scandals, corporate insider misconduct, and shareholder losses that occurred in 2001 and 2002. One of the most infamous scandals involved the Enron Corporation, and commentators often refer to corporation development occurring since 2001 as "post-Enron."
4. Post-Enron, lawmakers and commentators viewed the audit committee as a weak link in the governance system of many publicly traded corporations. Therefore, strengthening audit committees became a major focus of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 and related changes in NYSE and Nasdaq listing standards. These changes focused primarily on increasing (1) the independence and expertise of audit committee members; (2) the audit committee's control over the financial audit process, including selection of the outside auditor; (3) communication between the audit committee and the board; and (4) internal communications between the audit committee, the CEO, the CFO, and individuals charged with carrying out the internal auditing function. For a summary and critique of these and other post-Enron corporate governance changes, see Joel Seligman, A Modest Revolution in Corporate Governance, 80 Notre Dame L. Rev. 1159, 1167 (2005).
5. Under what circumstances might directors be liable for damages the corporation has suffered as a result of massive accounting fraud, on the grounds that the directors have failed to ensure that the corporation had in place an adequate system of financial controls or "ought to have known" that accounting fraud was occurring? An opinion by Vice Chancellor Strine dismissing such a claim sheds light both on what type of director conduct might be troublesome and on what type of conduct would be exemplary:

In this case, the plaintiffs have not come close to pleading a Caremark claim. Their conclusory complaint is empty of the kind of fact pleading that is critical to a Caremark claim, such as contentions that the company lacked an audit committee, that the company had an audit committee that met only sporadically and devoted patently inadequate time to its work, or that the audit committee had clear notice of serious accounting irregularities and simply chose to ignore them or, even worse, to encourage their continuation.

From the complaint, it is impossible to tell anything about the financial compliance systems in place at NVIDIA during the Contested Period. . . . For all I know, the NVIDIA audit committee met six times a year for half-day sessions, was comprised entirely of independent directors, had retained a qualified and independent audit firm that performed no other services for the company, was given no notice of the alleged irregularities by either management or the audit firm, had paid its audit firm to perform professionally credible random tests of management's integrity in recording revenue and other important financial data, and could not have been expected to discover the accounting irregularities, even when exercising a good faith effort, because discovery required disclosure by management or uncovering by the auditors of conduct deep below the surface of the financial statements.

Guttman v. Huang, 823 A.2d 492, 507 (Del. Ch. 2003).
6. It is important conceptually to distinguish between the board's oversight obligations with respect to compliance risk as opposed to strategic risk. Compliance risk has been defined as " [t] he risk that an organization will experience financial or reputational losses or legal sanctions or other negative consequences because of its unwillingness or failure to follow laws, regulations, rules, its code of ethics, its ethical standards, or legally applicable or otherwise binding industry codes of conduct, or to cooperate appropriately with regulators." ALI, Principles of the Law, Compliance and Enforcement for Organizations, Tent. Draft No. 2, ยง 1.01(n) (2021). On the other hand, strategic risks are those "that an organization expressly takes on to achieve its strategy and business objectives." Id. ยง 4.01 cmt . (f). The business judgment rule and exculpation provisions in corporate charters can be seen as part of the corporation framework that supports strategic risk taking. Should directors expect to be personally liable in damages if they intentionally cause the corporation to follow laws, regulations, or its own code of conduct?

# PROBLEM 4-11 

Tyron, Inc., a major supplier of medical products, agreed to provide products at preferred prices to the Veterans Administration (VA). Beginning in 2002, Tyron employees embarked on a scheme to overcharge the VA on most transactions by providing fraudulent price lists. As a result of this scheme, Tyron received its regular price on merchandise sold to the VA, resulting in overcharges that ultimately totaled $60 million. In 2010, the VA inspector general's office informed Tyron that it was investigating allegations that Tyron sales representatives were providing false information to VA purchasing agents. The Tyron board, composed of two "inside" directors and ten "outside" directors, met to discuss these charges. Tyron's CEO and board chair, Snar Hartley, reported to the board that she suspected there had been "isolated incidents" of fraud, but that the problems were not widespread. The board directed Hartley to write all key management personnel directing them to take all reasonable steps to detect and prevent any such fraudulent practices and to inform the VA that corrective actions had been taken. Hartley did as directed. In 2013, the VA inspector general discovered that the fraudulent practices were continuing and turned the matter over to the Justice Department, which indicted Tyron and several of its purchasing agents. At his trial for mail fraud, Al Hawkins, a regional sales manager, testified, "Yeah, I got Hartley's letter, but didn't take it seriously. They couldn't possibly expect us to meet our profit targets unless we played with the invoices." Tyron ultimately settled the cases against it, agreeing to pay fines and reimbursements in the total amount of $400 million.

A shareholder derivative suit - in the nature of a classic Caremark claim - has been filed claiming that the Tyron directors breached their fiduciary duty of loyalty. After the discovery phase, it appears uncontroverted that the directors had no actual knowledge of the fraudulent conduct prior to the VA's 2010 investigation, and had no actual knowledge that the fraudulent conduct had not ceased after Hartley's letter to key management personnel. There is, however, deposition testimony that supports a reasonable inference that the directors were aware as early as 2006 that similar fraudulent schemes were rampant at other firms dealing with the VA, and that ProMed, a competitor in the medical supply business, had been suspended from dealings with the VA in the summer of 2009 for wide-scale submission of false price lists and invoices.

Assess the directors' risk of liability for breach of the duty of loyalty.

# PROBLEM 4-12 

Cloud Ride, Inc. is an innovative ride-share and package delivery company that uses smartphone and Internet applications to link passengers and sellers of food and other products with drivers who use their own cars or trucks to provide rides or deliver products to a purchaser. In many of the political jurisdictions in which Cloud Ride operates or hopes to operate, its ride-share business model is of uncertain legality under local "for-hire vehicle" ordinances. Likewise, its product delivery business model is suspect under a variety of local, state, and federal rules and regulations. Cloud Ride's board believes that it eventually can bring its services into compliance with laws related to public safety. The board has authorized an aggressive campaign to repeal what it views as bad laws - those that only protect existing interest groups, such as traditional taxi-cab companies, short- and long-haul trucking companies, and unions protective of drivers, to the detriment of society. Accordingly, Cloud Ride's business strategy is to expand aggressively despite the existing ordinances, laws, and regulations, in the belief that there will soon be enough satisfied customers to create political pressure to change the various rules. They view the substantial fines, and even possible civil and criminal penalties, as a necessary and legitimate business expense.

If Cloud Ride's business strategy falters and legal costs, fines, penalties, and legal actions begin to pile up, are the Cloud Ride directors at substantial risk of liability for breach of their fiduciary duties?

[^0]: 9. Delaware G.C.L. ยง101 (b).
[^0]: 15. Graham v. Allis-Chalmers Mfg. Co., 188 A.2d 125 (Del. 1963).
[^0]: 14. Blue Bell Creameries USA, Inc. is a holding company. Its only assets are a 69.6 percent interest in Blue Bell Creameries, L.P., which actually produces and distributes ice cream, and a 100 percent interest in Blue Bell Creameries, Inc., the general partner of Blue Bell Creameries, L.P. Because the plaintiff is a stockholder of Blue Bell Creameries L'SA, the Court of Chancery requested supplemental briefing regarding the fiduciary duties of dual fiduciaries - because the holding company and the general partner have the same executives - and a board's responsibilities when its only asset is a majority stake in a subsidiary. . . . But in its decision, the Court of Chancery sensibly and properly collapsed the enterprise for purposes of analyzing the complaint.
[^0]: 42. "[T]here is no reference to Listeria or the lab reports in the minutes of the February or March 2014 meetings."
[^0]: 100. Caremark, 698 A. 2 d at 970 ("[1]t is important that the board exercise a good faith judgment that the corporation's information and reporting system is in concept and design adequate to assure the board that appropriate information will come to its attention in a timely manner as a matter of ordinary operations, so that it may satisfy its responsibility.").
[^0]: 112. See, e.g., City of Birmingham Ret. Sys. v. Good, 177 A.3d 47, 59 (Del. 2017) (affirming the Court of Chancery's dismissal of a Caremark claim because "reports to the board showed that the board 'exercised oversight by relying on periodic reports' from the officers" and that board presentations "identified issues with the coal ash disposal ponds, but also informed the board of the actions taken to address the regulatory concerns"); Stone, 911 A.2d at 372-73 (affirming the Court of Chancery's dismissal of a Caremark claim, in part, because an outside auditor's report "reflect[s] that the Board received and approved relevant policies and procedures, delegated to certain employees and departments the responsibility for filing [suspicious activity reports] and monitoring compliance, and exercised oversight by relying on periodic reports from them"); In re General Motors Derivative Litig., 2015 WL 3958724, at *14 (Del. Ch. 2015) (dismissing a Caremark claim where "GM had a system for reporting risk to the Board, but in the Plaintiffs' view it should have been a better system"); In re Citigroup Inc. S'holder Derivative Litig., 964 A.2d 106, 127 (Del. Ch. 2009) (dismissing a Caremark claim because "[p]laintiffs do not contest that Citigroup had procedures and controls in place that were designed to monitor risk"); Desimone v. Barrows, 924 A.2d 908, 940 (Del. Ch. 2007) (dismissing a Caremark claim premised on the plaintiff's allegations that a properly formed and well-functioning audit committee must have known about options backdating despite the fact that management intentionally kept this information from the audit committee); Guttman v. Huang, 823 A.2d 492, 506-07 (Del. Ch. 2003) (dismissing a Carmark claim because the plaintiff failed to plead any particularized facts about the audit committee's lack of reporting or information systems).