
## E. I. du Pont deNemours \& Co. v. Christopher <br> United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit 431 F.2d 1012 (5th Cir. 1970)

## GOLDBERG, CIRCUIT JUDGE:

This is a case of industrial espionage in which an airplane is the cloak and a camera the dagger. The defendants-appellants, Rolfe and Gary Christopher, are photographers in Beaumont, Texas. The Christophers were hired by an unknown third party to take aerial photographs of new construction at the Beaumont plant of E.I. duPont deNemours \& Company, Inc. Sixteen photographs of the DuPont facility were taken from the air on March 19, 1969, and these photographs were later developed and delivered to the third party.

DuPont employees apparently noticed the airplane on March 19 and immediately began an investigation to determine why the craft was circling over the plant. By that afternoon the investigation had disclosed that the craft was involved in a photographic expedition and that the Christophers were the photographers. DuPont contacted the Christophers that same afternoon and asked them to reveal the name of the person or corporation requesting the photographs. The Christophers refused to disclose this information, giving as their reason the client's desire to remain anonymous.

Having reached a dead end in the investigation, DuPont subsequently filed suit against the Christophers, alleging that the Christophers had wrongfully obtained photographs revealing DuPont's trade secrets which they then sold to the undisclosed third party. DuPont contended that it had developed a highly secret but unpatented process for producing methanol, a process which gave DuPont a competitive advantage over other producers. This process, DuPont alleged, was a trade secret developed after much expensive and time-consuming research, and a secret which the company had taken special precautions to safeguard. The area photographed by the Christophers was the plant designed to produce methanol by this secret process, and because the plant was still under construction parts of the process were exposed to view from directly above the construction area. Photographs of that area, DuPont alleged, would enable a skilled person to deduce the secret process for making methanol. DuPont thus contended that the Christophers had wrongfully appropriated DuPont trade secrets by taking the photographs and delivering them to the undisclosed third party. In its suit DuPont asked for damages to cover the loss it had already sustained as a result of the wrongful disclosure of the trade secret and sought temporary and permanent injunctions prohibiting any further circulation of the photographs already taken and prohibiting any additional photographing of the methanol plant. . . .
... [T]he Christophers argue that for an appropriation of trade secrets to be wrongful there must be a trespass, other illegal conduct, or breach of a confidential relationship. We disagree.

It is true, as the Christophers assert, that the previous trade secret cases have contained one or more of these elements. However, we do not think that the Texas courts would limit the trade secret protection exclusively to these elements. On the contrary, in Hyde Corporation v. Huffines, 1958, 158 Tex. 566, 314 S.W.2d 763, the Texas Supreme Court specifically adopted the rule found in the Restatement of Torts which provides:

One who discloses or uses another's trade secret, without a privilege to do so, is liable to the other if (a) he discovered the secret by improper means, or (b) his disclosure or use constitutes a breach of confidence reposed in him by the other in disclosing the secret to him. . . .
RESTATEMENT OF TORTS ยง757 (1939). Thus, although the previous cases have dealt with a breach of a confidential relationship, a trespass, or other illegal conduct, the rule is much broader than the cases heretofore encountered. Not limiting itself to specific wrongs, Texas adopted subsection (a) of the RESTATEMENT which recognizes a cause of action for the discovery of a trade secret by any "improper" means. . . .

The question remaining, therefore, is whether aerial photography of plant construction is an improper means of obtaining another's trade secret. We conclude that it is and that the Texas courts would so hold. The Supreme Court of that state has declared that "the undoubted tendency of the law has been to recognize and enforce higher standards of commercial morality in the business world." Hyde Corporation v. Huffines, supra, 314 S.W.2d at 773. That court has quoted with approval articles indicating that the proper means of gaining possession of a competitor's secret process is "through inspection and analysis" of the product in order to create a duplicate. K&G Tool \& Service Co. v. G \& G Fishing Tool Service, 1958, 158 Tex. 594, 314 S.W.2d 782, 783, 788. Later another Texas court explained:

The means by which the discovery is made may be obvious, and the experimentation leading from known factors to presently unknown results may be simple and lying in the public domain. But these facts do not destroy the value of the discovery and will not advantage a competitor who by unfair means obtains the knowledge without paying the price expended by the discoverer.
Brown v. Fowler, Tex. Civ. App. 1958, 316 S.W.2d 111, 114, writ ref'd n.r.e.
We think, therefore, that the Texas rule is clear. One may use his competitor's secret process if he discovers the process by reverse engineering applied to the finished product; one may use a competitor's process if he discovers it by his own independent research; but one may not avoid these labors by taking the process from the discoverer without his permission at a time when he is taking reasonable precautions to maintain its secrecy. To obtain knowledge of a process without spending the time and money to discover it independently is improper unless the holder voluntarily discloses it or fails to take reasonable precautions to ensure its secrecy.

In the instant case the Christophers deliberately flew over the DuPont plant to get pictures of a process which DuPont had attempted to keep secret. The Christophers delivered their pictures to a third party who was certainly aware of the means by which they had been acquired and who may be planning to use the information contained therein to manufacture methanol by the DuPont process. The third party has a right to use this process only if he obtains this knowledge through his own research efforts, but thus far all information indicates that the third party has gained this knowledge solely by taking it from DuPont at a time when DuPont was making reasonable efforts to preserve its secrecy. In such a situation DuPont has a valid cause of action to prohibit the Christophers from improperly discovering its trade secret and to prohibit the undisclosed third party from using the improperly obtained information.

We note that this view is in perfect accord with the position taken by the authors of the RESTATEMENT. In commenting on improper means of discovery the savants of the RESTATEMENT said:
f. Improper means of discovery. The discovery of another's trade secret by improper means subjects the actor to liability independently of the harm to the interest in the secret. Thus, if one uses physical force to take a secret formula from another's pocket, or breaks into another's office to steal the formula, his conduct is wrongful and subjects him to liability apart from the rule stated in this Section. Such conduct is also an improper means of procuring the secret under this rule. But means may be improper under this rule even though they do not cause any other harm than that to the interest in the trade secret. Examples of such means are fraudulent misrepresentations to induce disclosure, tapping of telephone wires, eavesdropping or other espionage. A complete catalogue of improper means is not possible. In general they are means which fall below the generally accepted standards of commercial morality and reasonable conduct.
RESTATEMENT OF TORTS ยง757, Comment f at 10 (1939).
In taking this position we realize that industrial espionage of the sort here perpetrated has become a popular sport in some segments of our industrial community. However, our devotion to free-wheeling industrial competition must not force us into accepting the law of the jungle as the standard of morality expected in our commercial relations. Our tolerance of the espionage game must cease when the protections required to prevent another's spying cost so much that the spirit of inventiveness is dampened. Commercial privacy must be protected from espionage which could not have been reasonably anticipated or prevented. We do not mean to imply, however, that everything not in plain view is within the protected vale, nor that all information obtained through every extra optical extension is forbidden. Indeed, for our industrial competition to remain healthy there must be breathing room for observing a competing industrialist. A competitor can and must shop his competition for pricing and examine his products for quality, components, and methods of manufacture. Perhaps ordinary fences and roofs must be built to shut out incursive eyes, but we need not require the discoverer of a trade secret to guard against the unanticipated, the undetectable, or the unpreventable methods of espionage now available.

In the instant case DuPont was in the midst of constructing a plant. Although after construction the finished plant would have protected much of the process from view, during the period of construction the trade secret was exposed to view from the air. To require DuPont to put a roof over the unfinished plant to guard its secret would impose an enormous expense to prevent nothing more than a school boy's trick. We introduce here no new or radical ethic since our ethos has never given moral sanction to piracy. The market place must not deviate far from our mores. We should not require a person or corporation to take unreasonable precautions to prevent another from doing that which he ought not do in the first place. Reasonable precautions against predatory eyes we may require, but an impenetrable fortress is an unreasonable requirement, and we are not disposed to burden industrial inventors with such a duty in order to protect the fruits of their efforts. "Improper" will always be a word of many nuances, determined by time, place, and circumstances. We therefore need not proclaim a catalogue of commercial improprieties. Clearly, however, one of its commandments does say "thou shall not appropriate a trade secret through deviousness under circumstances in which countervailing defenses are not reasonably available." . . .
# COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS 

1. Improper means has a substantial basis in other torts. See Comment f to RESTATEMENT OF TORTS, cited in duPont, and the RESTATEMENT (THIRD) OF UNFAIR COMPETITION ยง43 (defining improper means as including "theft, fraud, unauthorized interception of communications, inducement of or knowing participation in a breach of confidence, and other means either wrongful in themselves or wrongful under the circumstances of the case.").

DuPont provides an example of conduct prohibited by trade secret law that is probably not otherwise tortious. Should otherwise legitimate conduct be prohibited because it will disclose a trade secret? As Judge Posner noted in Rockwell, misappropriation of trade secrets is largely redundant if it does not reach any further than other torts. Nonetheless, the reach of the case is troubling. Consider the last sentence of the duPont opinion. What is wrong with "deviousness"? And why should "countervailing defenses" enter the picture?
2. There is general agreement that "reverse engineering"-that is, legally obtaining a product and taking it apart to see how it works-is not a misappropriation of a trade secret. Is reverse engineering (which is legal) any less devious than aerial photography? While it may be easy to reverse engineer a product, reverse engineering manufacturing processes can be especially difficult. Are there realistic alternatives to the sort of espionage condemned in duPont for those who seek to understand a process? Should there be some legally protected way of discovering a competitor's process?
3. Note how duPont dovetails with the discussion of precautions in Section B(2). DuPont could have protected itself against aerial photography by building a roof over its plant area before beginning internal construction. The Fifth Circuit rejected this alternative because it would "impose an enormous expense to prevent nothing more than a school boy's trick." On the other hand, the courts are clearly willing to put duPont to some expense to protect its secrets from prying eyes. If duPont had allowed its engineers to leave copies of the plant blueprints on subways, the result of the case might be very different.

How much expense is duPont required to incur to protect itself? The uniform answer of the courts is that only "reasonable" precautions must be taken. While this is not a terribly helpful answer, it may be a fairly practical one in any given industry, where companies can protect themselves by taking those precautions that are customary in that industry.

On the other hand, consider the Second Circuit's statement in Franke v. Wiltschek, 209 F.2d 493, 495 (2d Cir. 1953):

It matters not that the defendants could have gained their knowledge from a study of the expired patent and plaintiff's publicly marketed product. The fact is they did not. Instead they gained it from plaintiffs via their confidential relationship, and in doing so incurred a duty not to use it to plaintiff's detriment. This duty they have breached.
Is this consistent with the UTSA?
4. An interesting case involving only circumstantial evidence of misappropriation is Pioneer Hi-Bred International v. Holden Foundation Seeds, Inc., 35 F.3d 1226, 31 U.S.P.Q.2d 1385 (8th Cir. 1994). Plaintiff Pioneer could not establish a specific act of misappropriation, but it did show (through the use of three sophisticated scientific tests) that it was highly unlikely that defendant's hybrid seeds had been developed independently of plaintiff's seeds. Instead, due to genetic similarities, Pioneer showed that it was much more likely that those seeds were "derived from" a popular Pioneer hybrid. Pioneer was found to have maintained reasonable measures to guard against disclosure, including putting experimental seeds in bags marked with a secret code, allowing seeds to be grown only under strict nondisclosure arrangements, and leaving unmarked the fields in which the seeds had been planted. Pioneer was awarded $46.7 million in damages.

By contrast, the Fourth Circuit in Othentec Ltd. v. Phelan, 526 F.3d 135 (4th Cir. 2008), made it clear that speculation of theft based on the defendant's speed in entering the market was not enough. The court required "actual objective evidence" of misappropriation.
5. When does someone "acquire" a trade secret? The issue sometimes arises when an employee leaves an employer with trade secrets in its possession and starts work at a new company. The employee obtained the secrets lawfully. Is continuing to possess them a misappropriation? Has the new employer acquired the secrets by hiring the employee? See Six Dimensions, Inc. v. Perficient, Inc., 969 F.3d 219 (5th Cir. 2020) (company never acquired trade secrets where new employee possessed the secrets but never communicated them to the new employer). Using or disclosing the secrets, by contrast, would be unlawful, as we will see in the next section.
6. Can it ever be improper to obtain information in public view? In Compulife Software, Inc. v. Newman, 959 F.3d 1288 (11th Cir. 2020), the Eleventh Circuit held that the defendant could be liable for using a bot to scrape the data from plaintiff's website for price information, sending millions of queries to receive price quotes. While the public was free to access the site to get price quotes, the court nonetheless concluded that the aggregation of the price information on the site was still a secret and that sending automated requests was improper.

# PROBLEMS 

Problem II-8. Suppose that, at trial in the duPont case, the Christophers proved that they could have discovered the secrets contained in the layout of the duPont plant by careful viewing of images available on Google Earth. Are the Christophers then relieved from liability for misappropriation of trade secrets? Would your answer change if they had in fact obtained the photos by sneaking onto the duPont property on the ground?

Problem II-9. Prior to baseball games, catchers and pitchers agree on a set of hand signal codes that the catcher will use to coordinate pitch type-e.g., fast ball, curve ball, slider, change up-and location. During the game, catchers propose pitches using these signals. Pitchers nod in the affirmative when then agree, and then deliver the pitches.
With the advent of replay and other video technologies, Major League Baseball issued a series of memoranda warning teams that they may not use electronic equipment to communicate with each other during games, especially for the purpose of stealing signs.

During the 2017 season, the Houston Astros implemented video surveillance equipment to learn competing teams' signs. The technology quite possibly contributed to the Astros success in beating the Los Angeles Dodgers in the World Series.
