
One productive use of a deposition is to get admissions for a dispositive motion. It frequently is easier and more effective to use a deposition for this purpose than it is to use interrogatories or requests for admissions. In a deposition, you get the witness's own words rather than brief responses crafted by a lawyer. In a deposition, you also can immediately follow through, clarify, and pin down the witness through a progressive series of questions tailored to the witness's responses.

# Key to Getting Useful Admissions 

> Research elements of claims/defenses > Checklist admissions you need > Design questions to elicit necessary facts/admissions > Use precise, clear questions > Lead, if necessary > Do not linger once admission is obtained > Consider timing admissions questions to catch witness off guard To use a deposition in this way, there are a few things to keep in mind. First, you should research the legal bases for your claims or defenses in advance so you know before the deposition begins precisely what you will need from the deposition in order to support a dispositive motion. In contrast to a discovery deposition, you should know exactly where you want to take the witness, and your questions should be designed to do so in much the same way you would design them to prove points during a trial. Make a list of the precise points you need the deponent to make or confirm. Again, in contrast to a discovery deposition, you do not want to linger; once the witness makes the desired statement clearly on the record, move on to something else. The longer you linger, the more likely it is that the clarity of your record will be spoiled.

You will want to use a demeanor similar to that recommended for pinning down the deponent, including using cross-examination type questions. Frequently, it is useful to disguise some of the questions seeking admissions by asking them at unexpected times during the deposition. By varying your approach, you may avoid more guarded and qualified responses from the deponent as well as an avalanche of objections from opposing counsel.

^7 Sometimes, your best laid plans to invoke this style may backfire. One lawyer, in an effort to exhibit stern body language while deposing a hostile witness, leaned forward on his elbows with his hands clasped in front of his face. Unfortunately, the peanut butter on his suit sleeve from his son's breakfast ruined the effect.