
## a. The Annual Meeting and Other Forums for Shareholder Action

MBCA §§ 7.01-7.07, 7.21
Delaware G.C.L. §§ 211-213, 216, 222, 228
The voting rights provided to shareholders are an important means of promoting managerial accountability. If directors are managing poorly or selfishly, the shareholders can replace them at the next annual meeting or remove them prior to that time if permitted by the applicable state corporation code, and the corporation's, articles and bylaws. Alternatively, shareholders may sell their shares to a new team of managers who will use their purchased majority power to supplant the old managers. Shareholder political activity takes place against a backdrop of state statutory and judicial norms and doctrines that attempt to ensure shareholder suffrage while allowing directors to manage the corporation. On the one hand, shareholders are responsible for the election of directors and the approval of major changes in the corporation's structure or "constitution." On the other hand, directors must manage the corporation's business, a role that includes supervision of the shareholder governance process. Necessarily, directors have conflicting interests when they perceive that shareholders may seek to use their voting power either to elect a different slate of directors or to advocate policies that the directors oppose. In such circumstances, directors may be tempted to use their power to thwart shareholders' voting rights.

To minimize the risk that directors will act unfairly, corporation statutes specify in detail the substance of shareholders' voting and meeting rights, as well as the procedural rules that safeguard the shareholders' exercise of these rights. The following are some of the more important substantive and procedural statutory rules.

The annual meeting and election of directors. The paramount shareholder function is the annual election of directors. Most corporation codes protect the exercise of this right by specifying immutably that directors shall be elected at an annually held meeting of shareholders. Although directors have some discretion as to the timing and location of the annual meeting as part of their power to supervise corporate affairs or as a component of their ability to make or change the bylaws affecting the annual meeting, they may not entirely avoid it. Indeed, most corporation codes provide summary judicial procedures to ensure that a failure to hold a required annual meeting is quickly remedied. See MBCA § 7.03(a) and Delaware G.C.L. § 211 (c). Thus, shareholders are usually guaranteed a chance to meet at least once per year.

Special shareholders' meetings. All state corporation codes provide for special shareholders' meetings to address issues expressly identified in the meeting notice. Delaware's list of who can call a special meeting is short: the directors or whoever may be listed in the charter. This effectively blocks shareholder-initiated special meetings to oppose the current board. Many states follow MBCA §7.02, which authorizes the holders of 10 percent or more of a corporation's stock to call a special meeting. As with annual meetings, the board has some discretion as to the timing and location of special meetings, but may not avoid holding them if validly called as specified in the statutes, articles, or bylaws.

Action by written consent. Corporation statutes provide a third forum by which shareholders can act-written consent in lieu of a meeting. As with the special meeting, you will want to pay particular attention as to who may initiate such action in such forum. Recall the difference between Delaware and the MBCA concerning shareholders ability to call a special meeting. The two statutes also differ in the degree to which they allow action by written consent, but they have flipped positions. The MBCA has the more restrictive rule, permitting action only by unanimous written consent, which effectively limits its use to corporations with a limited number of shareholders, while Delaware permits action by written consent by shareholders collectively holding the number of votes that would be required to effect corporate action at a meeting attended by all shareholdersa majority in many cases. Remember, this is a default rule that can be changed by a contrary provision in the articles of incorporation: in fact, in Delaware public corporations, this is one of the more common changes to the statutory default rules.

Action by proxy. All corporation codes allow shareholders to enter into a simple proxy contract that authorizes another person to vote or otherwise act on the shareholder's behalf at an annual or special meeting of the corporation. While proxy voting is a convenience in corporations with a small number of stockholder's, it is a necessity for corporations with numerous stockholders, as will be explored in Part C of this chapter.

Record date: Determining shareholders entitled to vote. The shareholders who are entitled to participate and vote at a meeting are not necessarily the shareholders who own shares on the date of the meeting. In publicly traded corporations, shares constantly change hands, making it difficult to identify and give appropriate notice to persons buying shares in the last few days before a meeting. Consequently, state corporation codes provide that the shareholders entitled to vote are those owning shares on the "record date" specified by directors. Normally, the "record date" can be set anywhere from 60 to 10 days before the meeting in question. In states like Delaware, which allow shareholder action by nonunanimous written consent, the setting of a "record date" is somewhat more complicated. See Delaware G.C.L. § 228.

Virtual meetings. Delaware and the MBCA have been amended since the COVID-19 pandemic to authorize and facilitate virtual meetings, which may be held without any central, physical place where shareholders can assemble. The successful use of remote meeting technology has accelerated this development.

Despite legislative efforts to draw bright lines to protect shareholders' suffrage rights, courts are often required to rationalize conflicts between two statutory provisions, or to determine whether the directors' use of a statutorily conferred right should be enjoined or undone because inequitable. The following case illustrates the importance courts attach to fundamental shareholder voting and meeting rights when resolving such cases.
# Hoschett v. TSI International Software, Ltd. 

Delaware Court of Chancery, 1996
683 A.2d 43
Allen, Chancellor.
Pending now are cross motions for summary judgment in this suit seeking an order requiring TSI International Software, Ltd. to hold an annual meeting of its stockholders as required by Section 211 of the Delaware General Corporation Law (DGCL) and, incidental to that relief, to make publicly available to shareholders a stocklist, as required by Section 219 of the corporation law statute. It is admitted that TSI has not held an annual meeting within 13 months of the filing of the complaint (or thereafter for that matter). The case presents the single issue whether stockholder written consent action, which was taken pursuant to Section 228 of DGCL after the filing of the complaint, and that purported to elect directors for TSI, satisfies the requirement to hold an annual meeting and moots the claim stated in the complaint. For the reasons briefly set forth below I conclude that the consent action, assuming that it had the effect of duly designating directors of TSI, did not satisfy the corporation's obligation to comply with Section 211 and hold an annual meeting at which the company's directors are to be elected, in conformity with the certificate of incorporation.

## I.

The material facts are few and apparently not controverted. Plaintiff Fred G. Hoschett is the registered owner of 1,200 shares of common stock of the defendant TSI International Software, Ltd., a Delaware corporation having its principal place of business in Wilton, Connecticut. Formed in 1993, TSI is a privately-held corporation having a total of 962,274 shares of common stock and 860,869 shares of convertible preferred stock issued and outstanding, which are held by less than 40 stockholders of record. Pursuant to its certificate of incorporation, holders of TSI's common and preferred stock vote together on all matters, including the election of directors, with each share of common and preferred having the right to cast one vote. TSI has never held an annual meeting for the election of directors.

On October 5, 1995, plaintiff filed this action against TSI seeking, among other things . . . an order compelling an annual meeting of stockholders for the election of directors. On February 2, 1996, after some discovery, plaintiff moved for summary judgment asserting that there are no material facts in dispute and he is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. TSI responded with a cross motion for summary judgment supported by an affidavit establishing that on November 16, 1995, the company received a written consent representing a majority of the voting power of the corporation that "elected" five individuals each "to serve as a director of [TSI] until his or her successor is duly elected and qualified." On the basis of the validity of that action, defendant asserts that it has satisfied the need to hold an annual meeting for the election of directors.
# II. 

Summary judgment is appropriate when the record shows that "there is no genuine issue of material fact and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Del. Ch. Ct. R. 56(c); Gilbert v. El Paso Co., Del. Supr., 575 A.2d 1131, 1142 (1990).

Section 211 (b) of DGCL provides as follows:
An annual meeting of stockholders shall be held for the election of directors on a date and at a time designated by or in a manner provided in the bylaws. Any other proper business may be transacted at the annual meeting.

Section 211 (c) authorizes the Court of Chancery to order a corporation to hold such a meeting, but confers discretion on the Court in the exercise of such power.

Section 228(a) of DGCL provides as follows:
Unless otherwise provided in the certificate of incorporation, any action required by this chapter to be taken at any annual or special meeting of stockholders of a corporation, or any action which may be taken at any annual or special meeting of such stockholders, may be taken without a meeting, without prior notice and without a vote, if a consent or consents in writing, setting forth the action so taken, shall be signed by the holders of outstanding stock having not less than the minimum number of votes that would be necessary to authorize or take such action at a meeting at which all shares entitled to vote thereon were present. . . .

Most fundamentally, the current motion requires the court to interpret the legal meaning of these two Sections of the corporation code in a way that, to the maximum extent feasible, gives full effect to the literal terms of the language of each. For the reasons that follow, I conclude that the mandatory requirement that an annual meeting of shareholders be held is not satisfied by shareholder action pursuant to Section 228 purporting to elect a new board or to re-elect an old one.

The obligation to hold an annual meeting at which directors are to be elected, either for one year or for staggered terms, as the charter may provide, is one of the very few mandatory features of Delaware corporation law. Delaware courts have long recognized the central role of annual meetings in the scheme of corporate governance. See, e.g., Coaxial Communications, Inc. v. CNA Financial Corp., Del. Supr., 367 A.2d 994 (1976); Speiser v. Baker, Del. Ch., 525 A.2d 1001 (1987); Prickett v. American Steel and Pump Corp., Del. Ch., 251 A.2d 576 (1969). Even the shareholders' power to approve amendments to the charter does not extend so far as to permit a Delaware corporation legitimately to dispense with the annual meeting. The critical importance of shareholder voting both to the theory and to the reality of corporate governance, see Blasius Indus., Inc. v. Atlas Corp., Del. Ch., 564 A.2d 651 (1988), may be thought to justify the mandatory nature of the obligation to call and hold an annual meeting. The annual election of directors is a structured occasion that necessarily focuses attention on corporate performance. Knowing that such an occasion is necessarily to be faced annually may itself have a marginally beneficial effect on managerial attention and performance. Certainly, the annual meeting may in some instances be a bother to management, or even, though rarely, a strain, but in all events it provides a certain discipline and an occasion for interaction and participation of a kind. Whether it is welcome or resented by management, however, is in the end, irrelevant under Section 211 (b) and (c) of the DGCL and similar statutes in other jurisdictions.

Plainly plaintiff has established a prima facie case for the relief he seeks. See Speiser v. Baker, Del. Ch., 525 A.2d 1001, 1005 (1987) (recognizing that plaintiff had made a prima facie case upon proving that he was a stockholder and that several years had elapsed since the last annual meeting); Saxon Industries, Inc. v. NKFW Partners, Del. Supr., 488 A. 2 d 1298 (1984). The question this case presents is whether a controlling shareholder or a majority group may effectively avoid the annual meeting requirement, despite the command of Section 211, by the latter-day expedient of exercising consent to designate directors under Section 228. The Delaware courts apparently have not previously addressed this precise issue. There is of course a rather strong practical argument that it is efficient to recognize such a power or effect. The argument, as I see it, would run as follows: Only a relatively small and more or less tightly bound group of shareholders comprising a voting majority could effectively exercise a Section 228 consent action without a public tender offer. Where such a small and coherent group seeks to exercise control, it is especially unlikely that the formality of notice to all shareholders and a meeting will have any practical effect whatsoever. Therefore, if the law requires an annual meeting where a small, controlling group of shareholders is willing to act by consent to designate directors, it is highly likely that the law will simply be commanding expenditure of funds in a pointless exercise.

The flaws in this position appear to be at least three. First, the principle for which this practicality argument must contend is not limited to small coherent groups of shareholders who together can exercise control. If the principle is correct, management of public companies without a small controlling group, could solicit consents (albeit in conformity with SEC proxy rules) to "re-elect" or "elect" some or all of the board without ever having an annual meeting. Admittedly, in that setting shareholders who sought to initiate some corporate change might still initiate action by their own consent solicitation contest, or could resist the effort by others to "reelect" the board by soliciting revocations of consent, but public shareholders would be at some tactical disadvantage as to timing at the least and would arguably find convincing others more difficult than if an annual meeting were held. Second, the purposes served by the annual meeting include affording to shareholders an opportunity to bring matters before the shareholder body, as provided by the corporations charter and bylaws, such as bylaw changes. These other matters of possible business are not necessarily made irrelevant by a consent designation of directors, even if such designation is effective. Finally, while the model of democratic forms should not too strictly be applied to the economic institution of a business corporation (where for instance votes are weighted by the size of the voter's investment), it is nevertheless a not unimportant feature of corporate governance that at a noticed annual meeting a form of discourse (i.e., oral reports, questions and answers and in rare instances proxy contests) among investors and between shareholders and managers is possible. The theory of the annual meeting includes the idea that a deliberative component of the meeting may occur. Shareholders' meetings are mandated and shareholders authorized by statute to transact proper business because we assume that at such meetings something said may matter. Obviously these meetings are very far from deliberative convocations, but a keen realization of the reality of the degree of deliberation that is possible, should make the preservation of residual mechanisms of corporate democracy more, not less, important.

Thus, on balance I find an argument predicated on alleged efficiency and practicality, unpersuasive. I conclude absent unanimous consent that the mandatory language of Section 211 (b) places on TSI the legal obligation to convene a meeting of shareholders to elect directors pursuant to the constitutional documents of the firm.

What then is the legal meaning of the clause in Section 228 that authorizes "any action required by this chapter to be taken at an annual or special meeting" to be taken by written consent of shareholders? The established preference of our law is of course to give to such statutory language a literal reading, if that is possible. Thus "any action" must include shareholder action to remove directors from office and to designate persons as directors when there is a vacancy and the constitutional documents of the firm contemplate filling such vacancies by shareholders. See DGCL § 141(k) (removal), § 211 (b), (e) (election). Since the term of office of each of the directors of the company had expired, they acted as holdovers even though they continued to hold office. Thus, the action to reelect them or to elect their successors logically entailed removal and filling of the resulting vacancy.

The pertinent question is, when directors are designated through a consent process that removes holdovers and designates replacements, as here, for what term do they hold office? It is this question that is raised by the intersection of Section 211 and Section 228 and whose resolution can accommodate the command of each statute. That resolution is based on an interpretation that such directors hold office only until the next annual meeting of the shareholders, at which meeting the whole body of the company's shareholders may participate, to the extent the charter and bylaws define, in the election of the board. That is, shareholders may (if the certificate of incorporation and bylaws so provide) remove holdovers and fill vacancies on the board through exercise of the consent power, but doing so does not affect the obligation under Section 211 to hold an annual meeting. . . .

Thus, in my opinion, the effort of a group constituting a majority of the voting power of the corporation to preclude an annual meeting by acting pursuant to Section 228 is of limited effect. Specifically, while it did remove directors and may well have filled vacancies, it did so only until the next annual meeting of shareholders, which continues to be a mandatory obligation of the corporation. The Court of Chancery, in all events, maintains its traditional discretionary role when administering the equitable remedies of injunction and specific performance. See DGCL § 211 (c) (court "may" order holding of meeting). In this instance I apprehend no reason why equity should not specifically enforce the legal obligation imposed by Section 211 (b). TSI will therefore be ordered to hold an annual meeting and make available a complete list of stockholders as required by those statutory sections. . . .

# NOTES AND QUESTIONS 

Following this decision, the Delaware legislature amended one of the sections in question-Delaware G.C.L. § 211 -that had previously authorized nonunanimous written consent as an alternative to election at the annual meeting if the consent represented the minimum number of votes necessary to authorize or take such action. The post-Hoschett amendment provided that such action outside an annual meeting would only supplant an annual meeting if all of the directorships to which directors could be elected at an annual meeting held at the effective time of such action are vacant and are filled by such action. In the absence of that precise fact situation, the annual meeting would occur and any other proper business could be transacted. Why did the legislature move so quickly in response to this decision? Does the legislative action represent an undercutting of basic shareholder rights, or an appropriate elimination of a previously unnoticed conflict between statutory provisions?

# b. Removal of Directors and Other Midstream Private Ordering 

MBCA §§ 8.08-8.10
Delaware G.C.L. §§141(k),223
Directors are elected to serve a term that normally runs from one annual meeting to the next, but under staggered terms can cover a three-year span. Under what circumstances may shareholders remove and replace one or more directors prior to the expiration of their term? While the normal rule today allows shareholders to remove directors with or without cause by majority vote, that rule cannot be fully understood apart from the common law norms the rule replaces, and the statutory rules that allow variance from the new norm.

At common law, directors had a vested right to serve out their full term, and shareholders could remove directors only for good cause. This common law rule was detailed in Pilat v. Broach Systems, Inc., 260 A.2d 13, 15 (N.J. Super. Ct. Law Div. 1969):
(a) That irrespective of the existence of any provision in the certificate of incorporation or of a by-law, a corporation may remove a director during his term of office for cause arising from his acting in a manner inimical to the interests of the corporation; (b) during his term of office, a director may not be removed except for cause unless at the time of his election there existed a by-law that provided for the removal of a director without cause. If such by-law exists, then he has taken the office subject to the provisions of the by-laws; (c) a corporation may adopt a by-law providing for the removal of a director with or without cause, but such by-law, in so far as it refers to the removal of a director without cause, is of no value for the removal of a director who is in office at the time of the enactment of the by-law; (d) without a by-law which is in force prior to his election and at the time of his election, a director has a vested right to continue in his office to the end of his said term except if he is removed for cause.

All jurisdictions now have statutory default rules allowing shareholders to remove directors before the expiration of their term in office, with or without cause, by simple majority vote. Since this provision is now the norm, shareholders no longer need a provision within the corporation's bylaws or articles in order to be able to remove directors at some later date.

However, the new norms are accompanied by statutory rules that limit or eliminate shareholders' removal power when the corporation has instituted cumulative voting, staggered terms for directors, or class election of directors. The two dominant approaches are found in the MBCA and the Delaware corporation code.
Under the MBCA approach, found in §8.08, there are no restrictions on shareholders' power to remove directors if the corporation has classified the board into staggered terms. However, if the corporation has cumulative voting, shareholders cannot remove a director if the votes cast against removal would have been sufficient to elect that director. And, if a director is elected by a particular class of shareholders, that director may be removed only by a majority vote of that class, even if the majority of the shareholders of all classes are in favor of removal. Under the MBCA approach, these statutory restrictions are immutable. However, there are provisions for judicial removal for cause under certain circumstances. See MBCA § 8.09.

The Delaware approach, found in Delaware G.C.L. §141(k), differs from the MBCA in three important respects. First, it adds members of staggered boards to the list of directors protected from removal - they may only be removed for cause, a powerful insulation for the boards of such companies. Second, these Delaware protective provisions preserve the shareholders' power to remove even protected directors if done for cause, although as discussed below that is a daunting task in most settings. So, for example, the shareholders still have the power to remove a director on a classified board by majority vote if good cause is shown. Additionally, a majority retains the ability to change the default rules and thereby permit removal in any of these situations by amending the articles (if the board is agreeable to proposing such a change) to permit a without-cause removal for a staggered board or to remove cumulative voting itself.

The ability to remove a director for cause, as permitted in Delaware, is not easy. Both the substantive limitation imposed by the definition of "for cause," and the procedural safeguards that must be employed, make removal for cause a weapon of last resort. Whether director conduct constitutes cause is a fact-dependent analysis. Some guidance on what constitutes sufficient cause for removal is provided by Campbell v. Loew's, Inc., 134 A.2d 852 (Del. Ch. 1957). There, a shareholder group backing Vogel, the CEO of Loew's, sought to remove two directors, Tomlinson and Meyer, who were conducting a campaign to gain control of the board. The charges against Tomlinson and Meyer, detailed in a letter from Vogel to the shareholders, were evaluated by the Chancery Court upon Tomlinson and Meyer's request for injunctive protection.


#### Abstract

I next consider plaintiff's contention that the charges against the two directors do not constitute "cause" as a matter of law. It would take too much space to narrate in detail the contents on the president's letter. I must therefore give my summary of its charges. First of all, it charges that the two directors (Tomlinson and Meyer) failed to cooperate with Vogel in his announced program for rebuilding the company; that their purpose has been to put themselves in control; that they made baseless accusations against him and other management personnel and attempted to divert him from his normal duties as president by bombarding him with correspondence containing unfounded charges and other similar acts; that they moved into the company's building, accompanied by lawyers and accountants, and immediately proceeded upon a planned scheme of harassment. They called for many records, some going back twenty years, and were rude to the personnel. Tomlinson sent daily letters to the directors making serious charges directly and by means of innuendos and misinterpretations.

Are the foregoing charges, if proved, legally sufficient to justify the ouster of the two directors by the stockholders? I am satisfied that a charge that the directors desired to take over control of the corporation is not a reason for their ouster. Standing alone, it is a perfectly legitimate objective which is a part of the very fabric of corporate existence. Nor is a charge of lack of cooperation a legally sufficient basis for removal for cause.
The next charge is that these directors, in effect, engaged in a calculated plan of harassment to the detriment of the corporation. Certainly a director may examine books, ask questions, etc., in the discharge of his duty, but a point can be reached which his actions exceed the call of duty and become deliberately obstructive. In such a situation, if his actions constitute a real burden on the corporation then the stockholders are entitled to relief. The charges in this area made by the Vogel letter are legally sufficient to justify the stockholders in voting to remove such directors. Compare Markovitz v. Markovitz, 336 Pa. 145, 8 A.2d 46, 124 A.L.R. 359, and see 19 C.J.S. Corporations §738(4). In so concluding, I of course express no opinion as to the truth of the charges.

I therefore conclude that the charge of "a planned scheme of harassment" as detailed in the letter constitutes a justifiable legal basis for removing a director.

# 134 A.2d at 860-861. 

As noted in Auer v. Dressel, 118 N.E.2d 590, 593 (N.Y. 1954), before directors may be removed for cause "there must be the service of specific charges, adequate notice and full opportunity of meeting the accusation." The exact procedures required are discussed in Campbell v. Loew's.

When Vogel as president caused the notice of meeting to be sent, he accompanied it with a letter requesting proxies granting authority to vote for the removal of the two named directors. It is true that the proxy form also provided a space for the stockholder to vote against such removal. However, only the Vogel accusations accompanied the request for a proxy. Thus, while the stockholder could vote for or against removal, he would be voting with only one viewpoint presented. This violates every sense of equity and fair play in a removal for cause situation.

While the directors involved or some other group could mail a letter to the stockholders and ask for a proxy which would revoke the earlier proxy, this procedure does not comport with the legal requirement that the directors in question must be afforded an opportunity to be heard before the shareholders' vote. This is not an ordinary proxy contest case and a much more stringent standard must be invoked, at least at the initial stage, where it is sought to remove a director for cause. . . .

There seems to be an absence of cases detailing the appropriate procedure for submitting a question of director removal for cause for stockholder consideration. I am satisfied, however, that to the extent the matter is to be voted upon by the use of proxies, such proxies may be solicited only after the accused directors are afforded an opportunity to present their case to the stockholders. This means, in my opinion, that an opportunity must be provided such directors to present their defense to the stockholders by a statement which must accompany or precede the initial solicitation of proxies seeking authority to vote for the removal of such director for cause. If not provided then such proxies may not be voted for removal. And the corporation has a duty to see that this opportunity is given the directors at its expense.

134 A.2d at 861-862.

Adlerstein v. Wertheimer<br>Delaware Court of Chancery, 2002<br>2002 WL 205684

Lamb, Vice Chancellor.

## I.

This is an action pursuant to Section 225 of the Delaware General Corporation Law ("DGCL") brought by Joseph Adlerstein, the former Chairman and CEO of SpectruMedix Corporation ("SpectruMedix" or "the Company"), a Delaware corporation. SpectruMedix is in the business of manufacturing and selling instruments to the genetics and pharmaceutical industries and is headquartered in State College, Pennsylvania. Adlerstein's complaint is against the Company and three individuals who claim to be the current directors of the Company: Steven N. Wertheimer, Judy K. Mencher, and Ilan Reich.

At issue in the Complaint are a series of actions taken on July 9, 2001, at or in conjunction with a purported meeting of the SpectruMedix board of directors held at the New York City offices of McDermott, Will \& Emery ("MW \& E"). First, a board majority (consisting of Wertheimer and Mencher) voted to issue to the I. Reich Family Limited Partnership ("Reich Partnership"), an entity affiliated with Reich, a sufficient number of shares of a new class of supervoting preferred stock to convey to the Reich Partnership a majority of the voting power of the Company's stock. Second, the same majority voted to remove Adlerstein for cause as Chief Executive Officer of the Company, to strip him of his title as Chairman of the Board, and to appoint Reich to serve as Chief Executive Officer and as Chairman of the Board. Third, immediately after the board meeting, the Reich Partnership executed and delivered to SpectruMedix a written consent in lieu of stockholders meeting purporting to remove Adlerstein as a director. When the dust settled, the board consisted of Wertheimer, Mencher, and Reich; the Reich Partnership had replaced Adlerstein as holder of majority voting control; and Reich had replaced Adlerstein as Chairman and CEO.

Adlerstein seeks a determination that the July 9 meeting was not properly convened and, therefore, all actions taken at or in conjunction with that meeting are null and void. Adlerstein also contends that, even if the meeting was duly noticed and convened, the actions taken at the meeting by Wertheimer and Mencher were the product of a breach of the fiduciary duties they owed to him in his capacity as a director and the controlling stockholder.

# II. 

Adlerstein is a scientist and entrepreneur. He has a Ph.D. in physics and was involved with the funding and management of a number of start-up technology companies before founding SpectruMedix (originally named Premier American Technologies Company) in 1992.

Wertheimer, an investment banker, was introduced to Adlerstein by Selbst [a partner at MW \& E] and was elected to the board by Adlerstein on January 1, 2000. Mencher is a money manager with an expertise in high yield and distressed investments. On Wertheimer's recommendation, Adlerstein elected Mencher to the board on March 22, 2000.

In 1997, SpectruMedix completed an initial public offering of its common stock, raising net proceeds of $4.67 million, more than half of which was used to repay existing indebtedness. SpectruMedix experienced substantial net losses over the next several years, "burning" through all of the cash raised in the IPO. . . .

In 1999, to avoid a liquidity crisis, Adlerstein loaned SpectruMedix $500,000. In exchange, SpectruMedix gave Adlerstein a note that was convertible (at Adlerstein's option) into shares of a new Series B Preferred Stock of SpectruMedix that voted with the common and carried 80,000 votes per share. In January 2000, Adlerstein converted approximately $103,000 outstanding under this loan agreement into shares of Series B Preferred Stock. As a result, although Adlerstein owned only 21.41% of the equity of SpectruMedix, he controlled 73.27% of the voting power of the Company.

Late in 1999, before joining the board, Wertheimer convinced Adlerstein to hire Manus O'Donnell, an independent management consultant, to study and report on the status of the Company's management and finances. O'Donnell conducted his study and delivered a report dated January 2, 2000, in which he concluded that, unless the Company began making sales of instruments, it had sufficient cash and cash equivalents to continue operations only until September 2001.

During September 2000, as a result of increasing concern over SpectruMedix's deteriorating financial condition, Wertheimer and Mencher convinced Adlerstein to re-hire O'Donnell. On September 15, 2000, O'Donnell updated his report, shortening the period during which sufficient cash reserves were forecasted. He stated:
[S]ince my last forecast in December, the company burn rate has increased substantially . . . mainly due to increased headcount expense. As a result cash would last until May 2001 if grant money is received as predicted (at 115 K per month from October onward). If grants are not received, then cash would be exhausted in January 2001.

As O'Donnell noted, the change in forecast was due in large part to Adlerstein's decision to increase staffing levels from 23 to 51 . This headcount increase resulted in an escalation of the annual payroll by just over 100%. O'Donnell concluded by telling the board of directors that, at the then-current level of fixed expenses, SpectruMedix needed to sell and get paid for one machine per month in order to maintain an adequate cash position.

On March 28, 2001, a sexual harassment complaint was made against Adlerstein asserting that he threatened an employee's job because she objected to his inappropriate behavior toward her. An independent consultant was hired who, after an investigation, concluded that Adlerstein had been guilty of sexual harassment as defined in the Company's policy and had been less than candid in connection with the investigation. The consultant made an oral report of this conclusion to Wertheimer and Mencher on May 14, 2001. Because Adlerstein failed to pay the consultant's bill, a written report detailing the investigation was not delivered to the Company until September 2001.

On April 11, 2001, a meeting of the SpectruMedix board was held. At that meeting Adlerstein represented to the board, and the minutes of the meeting state, that three instruments had been purchased and shipped during the quarter ending March 31, 2001 and the Company was projecting sales of six to nine instruments for the quarter ending June 30, 2001. In fact, according to uncontroverted testimony, the Company sold only one instrument during the quarter ending March 31, 2001 and that sale was made on the condition that SpectruMedix would further develop the instrument to a commercially viable level of functionality.

During April 2001, Wertheimer and Mencher convinced Adlerstein to again hire O'Donnell to generate an updated report on the financial condition of the Company. The resulting report, which projected a cash balance of $66,000 for the Company as of May 31, 2001, was discussed at an April 30, 2001 meeting of the board. As reflected in the board's minutes for that meeting Adlerstein on the one hand and Wertheimer and Mencher on the other had very different reactions to the Company's financial state:
[Adlerstein] did not regard the situation as quite as desperate as the other directors. He said that the Company had previously faced similar cash crises and had weathered them. He said that he had found money to keep the Company alive in the past, and if required to do so again, he would find the resources. Mr. Wertheimer and Ms. Mencher lauded him for his past efforts to save the Company, but said that the [y] were seeking to bring the Company to a cash neutral or profitable position as promptly as possible. The point, Ms. Mencher said, was to put the Company in a position where Dr. Adlerstein wouldn't be required to keep the Company afloat personally in the future.

This divergence in perspective continued through the July 9 meeting.
The board met again on May 25, 2001. Adlerstein reported that the Company was "low on cash" but delivered an upbeat report on the status of discussions he was having with several potential strategic partners. Wertheimer and Mencher remained concerned about the Company's deteriorating financial condition and began to question seriously the information Adlerstein was providing to them. As Mencher testified:
[I]t became clear that we were not getting the entire picture of what was going on with the company and that the company was quickly heading . . . toward a major liquidity crisis-if it wasn't already in one-and that the company needed a crisis manager, just for somebody to get in and tell the board what was really going on and how long the company had to survive.

Thus, Wertheimer and Mencher suggested that the Company should again hire O'Donnell's firm to help the Company in reducing expenses and improving the instrument manufacturing process. Adlerstein agreed, and the entire board unanimously resolved to do so. O'Donnell and his colleague, Gordon Mason, agreed to take on such an assignment provided SpectruMedix execute a written consulting agreement.

During the month of June 2001, O'Donnell and members of his firm began to play a hands-on role at the Company's headquarters, reducing the number of employees while improving the instrument manufacturing process. Among other things, they drew up an organizational chart that defined lines of authority and responsibility in the Company, something Adlerstein had refused to do. These changes were met enthusiastically by the Company's senior employees.

Adlerstein conducted a rearguard action against O'Donnell's restructuring efforts. Most notably, he refused to sign a written contract with O'Donnell, notwithstanding the direction of the board that he do so. He also was frequently away from headquarters in State College during June but, when he did appear, acted to undo changes that had been implemented. Eventually, O'Donnell and Mason stopped working. Wertheimer and Mencher concluded that Adlerstein was intentionally impeding the progress of the consultants and resolved to investigate the situation at SpectruMedix for themselves.

Wertheimer contacted three of the four department heads at the Company and learned that these individuals were planning to quit their jobs with SpectruMedix if organizational and other changes implemented by the consultants were not kept in place. On July 2, 2001, O'Donnell forwarded a report to Wertheimer and Mencher which concluded that Adlerstein was "the central problem" at the Company, because "he is totally lacking in managerial and business competence and has demonstrated an unwillingness to accept these shortcomings." O'Donnell further opined: "For SpectruMedix to have any chance, [Adlerstein] must be removed from any operating influence within the company."

In June 2001, Wertheimer contacted Reich to discuss involving him as both an investor and manager of SpectruMedix. Wertheimer knew that Reich had the personal wealth and managerial experience to take on a restructuring of SpectruMedix. ^7 As he testified at trial: "Ilan was the only guy I knew that had money and had the skills to go in and . . . pull this out of the fire. . . . No institutional investor would go anywhere near a company like this. It had to be somebody that liked to get his hands dirty, who liked to go into a company and basically try and make something out of something that was in a lot of trouble."

On June 27, 2001, Reich met with Selbst and O'Donnell to discuss the business of SpectruMedix. Adlerstein was unaware of this meeting. The next day, Reich and Adlerstein met in New York. Reich testified that he then determined that he would only be willing to invest in SpectruMedix if he, and not Adlerstein, were in charge of the Company. Reich thereafter executed a confidentiality agreement and received non-public information in due diligence.

On June 30, Reich sent an e-mail to Selbst that referred to an upcoming meeting between Selbst and Wertheimer for the purpose of discussing Adlerstein's Series B Preferred shares. Adlerstein was not copied on this e-mail and was not aware of this meeting. Also on June 30, Wertheimer had a discussion with Reich about firing Adlerstein.

On July 2, 2001, Reich participated in a conference call with Wertheimer and Mencher and later that day met with Wertheimer to discuss his potential investment. At that meeting, the option of firing Adlerstein for cause from his position as CEO due to his sexual harassment of a Company employee was discussed, as was Adlerstein's voting control over the Company. Adlerstein had no idea this meeting was taking place. But by this time Reich knew he would have an opportunity to take over SpectruMedix.

On July 3, 2001, Reich met with various department heads of the Company during a due diligence visit to the SpectruMedix headquarters. Aware of this visit, Adlerstein acted to discourage senior officials at State College from cooperating fully with Reich. As he e-mailed one of the Company's principal scientists:

I am not willing to have you spend an inordinate amount of time satisfying [Reich's] . . . requests at the risk of exposing our innards (i.e. technologies, analysis) to someone . . . who, in the final analysis, is by no means a sure thing to invest in [SpectruMedix].

# A. SPECTRUMEDIX'S INSOLVENCY 

By the beginning of July 2001, if not earlier, SpectruMedix was either insolvent or operating on the brink of insolvency. The Company had very little cash (or cash equivalents) and no material accounts receivable due. At the same time, the Company had substantial and increasing accounts payable, Adlerstein was not communicating with creditors, and key parts vendors were refusing to make deliveries unless paid in cash. Indisputably, SpectruMedix did not have sufficient cash on hand to meet its next employee payroll on July 13, 2001, and had no realistic expectation of receiving sufficient funds to do so from its operations. Moreover, the Company's auditors were unwilling to issue the opinion letter necessary for it to file an annual report with the SEC, which was due to be filed on July 10th.

## B. THE JULY 9, 2001 BOARD MEETING

## 1. Notice

Wertheimer testified that, on or about July 5, 2001, he and Adlerstein spoke on the telephone about the deteriorating financial condition of the Company and matters relating to a significant arbitration involving SpectruMedix. In that proceeding, MW & E had moved to withdraw as counsel to SpectruMedix, as a result, among other things, of disputes over non-payment of fees and expenses. Wertheimer and Adlerstein may have discussed the fact that the arbitrator planned to hold a conference on the motion to withdraw on Monday, July 9, and wished to be able to speak to Adlerstein by telephone. Wertheimer testified that, during this conversation, Adlerstein agreed to convene a meeting of the board of directors at 11 A.m. on July 9, 2001, at MW \& E's New York City offices. Wertheimer further testified that Adlerstein was aware that the topics to be discussed at the meeting would be (i) SpectruMedix's dire financial condition and immediate need for cash, (ii) the arbitration, including the need to retain new counsel, (iii) the formal execution of an agreement to retain O'Donnell, and (iv) the Company's certified public accountants' refusal to issue an audit opinion. Adlerstein maintains that, while he agreed to meet with Wertheimer on July 9 in MW \& E's offices, the only purpose of that meeting was to be available to speak to the arbitrator about the motion to withdraw. He denies that he ever agreed to call a board meeting for that time or knew that one was to be held.

The trial record contains plainly divergent testimony on the subject of whether Adlerstein called the July 9 meeting or was given notice of it. Mencher, Reich, and Selbst all support Wertheimer's testimony, although they all learned about the meeting from Wertheimer. Thus, while their testimony is corroborative of his, it provides no independent evidence of Adlerstein's state of knowledge. Adlerstein's trial testimony was undermined by Karl Fazler, the Company's business manager, who spoke with Adlerstein on the morning of July 9, and remembered Adlerstein telling him that he was on his way to MW \& E's offices in order to meet with the board of directors. At the same time, Adlerstein's testimony is buttressed, to some degree, by the fact that none of the directors received written notice of a meeting although, the evidence suggests, SpectruMedix usually circulated notice and a proposed agenda by e-mail.
# 2. Adlerstein Was Kept in the Dark About the Reich Proposal 

Mencher's notes show that Reich first proposed terms for an acquisition of SpectruMedix no later than July 5. On that date, she had a teleconference with Wertheimer and Reich in which they discussed the outline of the transaction and the need to terminate Adlerstein. Her notes contain the entry "fire Joe + negotiate a settlement," followed by a summary of terms for his separation.

The documents necessary for a transaction with Reich were in draft form by July 6, 2001. Selbst sent these documents by e-mail to Wertheimer, Mencher, and Reich. He did not send them to Adlerstein, who was deliberately kept unaware that Reich had made a proposal until the July 9 meeting. At trial, Wertheimer was asked whether "[b]etween the time you got the proposal from Mr. Reich-until the time you walked in to the board meeting on July 9th, did you tell Doctor Adlerstein that you were negotiating a proposal with Ilan Reich. . . ." He responded that he had not:
A. Because I wanted to save the company at that point. . . .So, no, I didn't tell him that this was going on, because I had no faith that he would - that he would, first of all, you know, go along with the deal; but secondly, I was also worried that he would do something to scare off the investor.

Although Adlerstein argues that the Reich proposal was finalized on Friday, July 6, the record supports the conclusion that Reich and Wertheimer were still negotiating some terms of the deal on the morning of July 9 and that final documents were not ready until that time. The deal finally negotiated provided, subject to board approval, that the Reich Partnership would invest $1 million in SpectruMedix, Reich would assume the active management of SpectruMedix, and SpectruMedix would issue shares of its Series C Preferred Stock to the Reich Partnership carrying with them voting control of the Company.

## 3. The Meeting Occurs

Adlerstein arrived late at MW \& E's New York City offices to find Selbst and Wertheimer waiting for him. He inquired about the conference with the arbitrator and was told that the matter had been postponed. Mencher was hooked in by phone and, according to Wertheimer, Adlerstein called the meeting to order and "wanted to talk about lawyers and the arbitration." Wertheimer then interrupted and said that they needed to talk about finances. He then told Adlerstein that there was a proposal from Reich and handed him a term sheet showing the material elements of the deal.

After reviewing it, Adlerstein told Wertheimer and Mencher that he was not interested in the Reich proposal because it would dilute his shares in the Company and result in him losing voting control. He has since testified that his lack of interest was also because he believed the price of $1 million to be insufficient for control of SpectruMedix. He did not, however, voice this concern at the time.

In response to the objection that he did voice, Wertheimer and Mencher explained that in their judgment the Company was in immediate need of funds and the investment by Reich was needed to avoid liquidation. Wertheimer asked Adlerstein directly if he was personally in a position to provide the needed funds. Adlerstein responded that he was not. Wertheimer and Mencher tried to engage Adlerstein in further discussion about the Reich proposal, but Adlerstein sat silent. He testified that the reason for his silence was advice given to him by Selbst in the past: "when in doubt about what to do in a situation like this, keep your mouth shut." Because he and Mencher could not get Adlerstein to engage in any dialogue regarding the proposed transaction, Wertheimer moved the transaction for a vote. Wertheimer testified:

There was no use in talking about it, because [Adlerstein] wouldn't talk. . . .So the fact that the discussion didn't go any longer, the finger should not be pointed at us, it should be pointed at the person that cut off the discussion. That is Doctor Adlerstein.

Adlerstein has testified that when the vote on the transaction was called he did not participate. The minutes of the meeting reflect that he voted "no." Each of the others present at the meeting-Wertheimer, Mencher, and Selbst - confirms the statement in the minutes. ^19

The board then took up the question of removing Adlerstein "for cause" from his office as CEO and Chairman of SpectruMedix. The elements of "cause" assigned were mismanagement of the Company, misrepresentations to his fellow board members as to its financial situation, and sexual harassment in contravention of his employment contract. After the meeting, the Reich Partnership executed and delivered a stockholder's written consent removing Adlerstein as a director of SpectruMedix. Reich was chosen to replace him.

Some months after July 9, Adlerstein executed a written consent purporting to vote his Series B Preferred shares to remove Wertheimer and Mencher from the board. Adlerstein initiated this Section 225 action on September 11, 2001.

# III. 

The general purpose of Section 225 is to provide "a quick method of review of the corporate election process in order to prevent a corporation from being immobilized by controversies as to who are its proper officers and directors." Because it is summary in nature, a Section 225 proceeding is limited to those issues that must necessarily be considered in order to resolve a disputed corporate election process. A Section 225 action focuses narrowly on the corporate election at issue and is not an appropriate occasion to resolve matters ancillary or secondary to that election.

Here, the question is whether the meeting held on July 9 was a meeting of the board of directors or not. If it was not, Adlerstein continues to exercise a majority of the voting power and is now the sole lawful director. If it was, I must then address a welter of arguments advanced by Adlerstein to prove that the actions taken at the July 9 meeting ought to be invalidated because Wertheimer and Mencher (and Selbst) all operated in secret to negotiate terms with Reich while keeping Adlerstein deliberately uninformed about their plan to present the Reich proposal at the July 9 meeting. The more persuasive of these arguments are predicated largely on the decisions of the Court of Chancery in VGS, Inc. v. Castiel [2000 Del. Ch. LEXIS 122 (Del. Ch. 2000)] and Koch v. Stearn [1992 Del. Ch. LEXIS 163 (Del. Ch. 1992)].

Finally, if all else fails, Adlerstein argues that Wertheimer and Mencher violated their fiduciary duties of care and loyalty to SpectruMedix in approving the Reich transaction with inadequate information and on terms that were unfair to the Company and its stockholders. He asks for an order canceling the shares and disregarding any effort by Reich to vote them.

For the reasons next discussed, I conclude that, although the meeting of July 9 was called as a board meeting, the actions taken at it must be invalidated. Thus, it is unnecessary to reach the last issue presented by Adlerstein.

# A. THE CALL OF THE MEETING 

On balance, the evidence at trial indicates that Adlerstein called the July 9 meeting. The procedure for giving notice of a board meeting is typically set forth in a Company's certificate or bylaws. The bylaws of SpectruMedix provide that special meetings of the board "may be called by the president on two (2) days' notice to each director by mail or forty-eight (48) hours notice to each director either personally or by telegram. . . ." I credit Wertheimer's account of his July 5 telephone call with Adlerstein. There is no reason to believe that Adlerstein would not have agreed to convene a board meeting on July 9 , in view of the many urgent problems confronting SpectruMedix at that time. Fazler's testimony that Adlerstein called him on the morning of the meeting and said that he was on his way to a board meeting provides additional support for Wertheimer on this point.

In reaching this conclusion, I have considered and reject Adlerstein's argument that the lack of any written notice or agenda for the July 9 meeting proves that it was not a board meeting. Concededly, the record supports Adlerstein's contention that, on many other occasions, someone, usually Selbst, distributed notices and agendas for board meetings of SpectruMedix. Nevertheless, the SpectruMedix bylaws do not require either written notice or the advanced distribution of a proposed agenda. Moreover, the record shows that, on other occasions, meetings of the board of directors were held without written notice or an agenda.

## B. THE VALIDITY OF THE ACTIONS TAKEN AT THE JULY 9 MEETING

A more difficult issue is whether the decision of Wertheimer, Mencher, and Selbst (no doubt with the knowledge of Reich) to keep Adlerstein uninformed about their plan to present the Reich proposal for consideration at the July 9 meeting invalidates the board's approval of that proposal at the meeting.
There are several factors that weigh against a finding of invalidity. The first is the absence from SpectruMedix's bylaws of any requirement of prior notice of agenda items for meetings of the board of directors, coupled with the absence of any hard and fast legal rule that directors be given advance notice of all matters to be considered at a meeting. Second, is the good faith belief of Wertheimer and Mencher that Adlerstein should be removed from management and that, if they had told him about the Reich proposal ahead of time, he would have done something to kill the deal. Third, is the fact of SpectruMedix's insolvency and the argument that the exigencies created by that insolvency gave Wertheimer and Mencher legal warrant to "spring" the Reich proposal on Adlerstein without warning.

Ultimately, I am unable to agree that these factors, either singly or in the aggregate, provide legal justification for the conduct of the July 9 meeting. Instead, I conclude that in the context of the set of legal rights that existed within SpectruMedix at the time of the July 9 meeting, Adlerstein was entitled to know ahead of time of the plan to issue new Series C Preferred Stock with the purposeful effect of destroying his voting control over the Company. This right to advance notice derives from a basic requirement of our corporation law that boards of directors conduct their affairs in a manner that satisfies minimum standards of fairness.

Here, the decision to keep Adlerstein in the dark about the plan to introduce the Reich proposal was significant because Adlerstein possessed the contractual power to prevent the issuance of the Series C Preferred Stock by executing a written consent removing one or both of Wertheimer and Mencher from the board. He may or may not have exercised this power had he been told about the plan in advance. But he was fully entitled to the opportunity to do so and the machinations of those individuals who deprived him of this opportunity were unfair and cannot be countenanced by this court. ^28

This result is consistent with the results reached in similar cases. For example, in VGS, Inc. v. Castiel [2000 WL 1277372 (Del. Ch. Aug. 31, 2000)], the court struck down a merger approved by the written consent of two out of three managers of a Delaware LLC for the purpose of transferring voting control over the enterprise from one member to another. Because the disadvantaged member (who was the third manager) possessed the power to remove one of the other two managers and, thus, could have prevented the merger from happening, the court concluded that it was a breach of the duty of loyalty for the others to have acted in secret to effect the transaction. As then Vice Chancellor (now Justice) Steele wrote [id. at *2-3]:

While a majority of the board acted by written consent, as all involved surely knew, had the original member's manager received notice beforehand that his appointed manager contemplated action against his interests he would have promptly attempted to remove him. Because the two managers acted without notice to the third manager under circumstances where they knew that with notice... he could have acted to protect his majority interest, they breached their duty of loyalty to the original member and their fellow manager by failing to act in good faith.

Adlerstein argues that the rationale of VGS operates a fortiori in this case because the documents that governed the LLC in VGS allowed the LLC's managers to act by non-unanimous written consent. Thus, there was no legal necessity for them to meet with the third manager at all. Despite this unusual governance provision, the court ruled that the two managers owed a fiduciary duty to the other, in both his managerial and membership capacities, to disclose their plan to authorize the dilutive merger in order to allow him to exercise his voting control to protect his controlling position. Here, Wertheimer and Mencher could not act outside of a meeting and could not convene a meeting without notice to Adlerstein. Thus, Adlerstein argues, their obligation to give him advance notice of the Reich proposal is even clearer.

It is difficult to accept this argument fully because the absence of a meeting was itself a fundamental problem in VGS. If there had been a meeting, it is likely that Castiel, the controlling member, would have had some opportunity to protect himself at that time by immediately removing the third manager from office. Here, by contrast, there was a meeting, and Adlerstein had some notice of the Reich proposal before it was approved by the SpectruMedix board of directors. The question is whether he had an adequate opportunity to protect his interests.

The same question has been addressed in other cases, most notably, in Koch v. Stearn [1992 WL 181717 (Del. Ch. July 28, 1992)]. In that case, there was a fourperson board of directors and two stockholders, Stearn and Koch, each of whom had the right to appoint (and remove) two directors. Due to substantial financial pressures on the Company, three of the directors decided that Stearn should be removed from his positions as Chairman and Chief Executive Officer. They invited Stearn and his counsel to attend a meeting but did not send to either of them the draft resolutions that they had circulated among themselves calling for Stearn's removal. The board met and, over Stearn's vigorous objection, adopted the resolutions. Either then, or later in the meeting, Stearn called for his designee to quit the board but did not execute the written consent of stockholders necessary under Section 228 of the DGCL to effect the removal and replacement of that director.

The court concluded that Stearn's presence at the meeting was obtained by trickery or deceit because his fellow directors hid from him their plans for his ouster. Alternatively, the court found that, even if Stearn had waived his objection to the meeting by remaining and participating, the actions taken were, nonetheless, void, for the following reasons [id. at *15]:

I find that Stearn was disadvantaged by the other directors' failure to communicate their plans to him. If Stearn had seen the draft resolutions before the meeting, he could have exercised his right to remove [his designee] as a director and he could have replaced [him] with another nominee who would vote with Stearn to block Stearn's removal. Without doubt, Stearn's inability to thus protect himself constituted a disadvantage.

It is equally the case here that Adlerstein was disadvantaged "by the other directors' failure to communicate their plans to him." Had he known beforehand that Wertheimer and Mencher intended to approve the Reich proposal and to remove him from office at the July 9 meeting, he could have exercised his legal right to remove one or both of them and, thus, prevented the completion of those plans. The authority of both Koch and VGS strongly support the conclusion that Adlerstein had a right to such advance notice in order that he might have taken steps to protect his interests. . . .

# IV. 

For all the foregoing reasons, I have concluded that the actions taken at the July 9, 2001 meeting must be undone. Nevertheless, I recognize that the financial and business condition of SpectruMedix has changed materially since July 9, 2001. I also note plaintiff's proposal, during the trial, that I should appoint a custodian for SpectruMedix rather than reinstate Adlerstein's control. Under these circumstances, before entering a final order, the court will solicit the parties' views as to the appropriate form of relief. . . .

## NOTES AND QUESTIONS

1. Footnote 19 describes Adlerstein's conversations with Selbst about using his voting power to prevent Mencher and Wertheimer from acting against Adlerstein's interests. If you were advising Adlerstein at the July 9 board meeting, what would your advice have been? What role would the bylaw mentioned in footnote 19 play in your advice?
2. Ilan Reich began his career as a Wall Street lawyer at the age of 25 . He was a rising superstar in his firm's mergers and acquisitions practice, but he became involved as a tipper in an insider trading network involving numerous Wall Street luminaries. Reich confessed to his involvement three months before he was to become a partner. His fall from grace was catastrophic. He was disbarred, fined $485,000, and imprisoned. But, despite all odds, Reich emerged from prison and pulled his life back together, eventually becoming a successful business turn-around specialist. For more on Reich's colorful life and career, including his recovery from a near-fatal plane crash and from a brain tumor, see Jennifer Reingold, The Rise and Fall (and Subsequent Fall and Rise) of Ilan K. Reich, Fortune Mag., July 21, 2007, at 149.

## PROBLEM 3-8

Biotech, Inc. has 10 million common shares. As specified by its bylaws, Biotech has a nine-member board, divided into three equal classes. As specified in its articles, the corporation also has cumulative voting. Biotech's largest shareholder, Gene Robbins, owns 2 million shares. A small group of institutional investors (the Powers) collectively own 3 million shares. The remainder of the corporation's shares are widely held.

On March 10, Biotech's board fired CEO Gene Robbins in response to concerns expressed by the Powers. In late March, new CEO Helen Hall called a special board meeting to which Robbins was not invited and informed the board that she had uncovered evidence that Robbins lied to the board in several recent reports.

The board wishes to remove Robbins as a director. Assume, alternatively, that Biotech is incorporated in Delaware or in an MBCA jurisdiction. Evaluate all of the board's options for seeking Robbins's removal. What are the advantages and disadvantages of each? Are any options foreclosed?

# PROBLEM 3-9 

Search for the articles of incorporation of your favorite corporation (if publicly held, you can use the SEC's EDGAR database). Determine how the company addresses (1) how shareholders vote, (2) how the board of directors is elected, (3) director removal, (4) whether shareholders can act by written consent, and (5) the purpose of the corporation.


[^0]: 7. Wertheimer was aware that in the mid-1980s Reich had pleaded guilty to federal charges of trading on inside information while he was a partner in a prominent New York City law firm and served a one-year prison sentence. Nevertheless, he also knew that, from 1998 to 2000 , Reich was employed as the President and CEO of Inamed Corporation, a publicly traded company, and had accomplished a significant turnaround of that company. Wertheimer knew that Reich had left Inamed in 2001 and might be interested in a new challenge.
[^0]: 19. Adlerstein also testified that, when he realized Wertheimer and Mencher were prepared to act against his interests, he asked Selbst about using his voting power to prevent this from happening. According to Adlerstein, Selbst told him that he could not, due to a 10 -day notice requirement for convening a meeting of shareholders. The others deny that this exchange took place. According to the minutes of the July 9 meeting, the second item of business was an amendment to the Company's bylaws, approved by a vote of 2 to 1 , with Adlerstein opposed. Prior to its amendment, the bylaw purported to proscribe shareholder action by written consent. Of course, this bylaw was very likely unenforceable as a matter of Delaware law. Datapoint Corp. v. Plaza Sec. Co., 496 A.2d 1031, 1035 (Del. 1985). The importance of this bylaw and its effect on Adlerstein's right to remove Wertheimer and Mencher was not explored by the parties at trial.
[^0]: 28. The outcome in this case flows from the fact the Adlerstein was both a director and a controlling stockholder, not from either status individually. In the absence of some special contractual right, there is no authority to support the argument that Adlerstein's stockholder status entitled him to advance notice of actions proposed to be taken at a meeting of the board of directors. The actions may be voidable if improperly motivated. Condec v. Lunkenheimer, [230 A.2d 769] (Del. Ch. 1967). But the absence (or presence) of notice is not a critical factor. Similarly, in the absence of a bylaw or other custom or regulation requiring that directors be given advance notice of items proposed for action at board meetings, there is no reason to believe that the failure to give such notice alone would ordinarily give rise to a claim of invalidity. Dillon v. Berg, 326 F. Supp. 1214, 1221 (D. Del.), aff'd, 453 F.2d 876 (3d Cir. 1971). Nevertheless, when a director either is the controlling stockholder or represents the controlling stockholder, our law takes a different view of the matter where the decision to withhold advance notice is done for the purpose of preventing the controlling stockholder/director from exercising his or her contractual right to put a halt to the other director's schemes.