
The central actor in the economic conception of the firm is the entrepreneur. ^2 As Frank Knight described, the entrepreneur is the person who does two critical tasks. ^3 First, the entrepreneur directs the business and exercises the ultimate business judgment. The entrepreneur decides what to make and how to make it. In the real world, this does not involve simply reacting to what consumers want. Rather, it involves forecasting whether, at what price, and in what quantities consumers would be willing to buy a particular product or service if it were produced and made available to the market. It 2. The sole proprietor is in economic parlance the firm's entrepreneur.
3. For the seminal analysis of the entrepreneur, see Frank H. Knight, Risk, Uncertainty, and Profit (1921).
involves forecasting whether and how a team of employees can be hired and organized to produce the product or service at a cost that will produce a profit. In other words, it involves managing in the shadow of uncertainty.

The entrepreneur's second task is accepting full responsibility for his or her business decisions by being the residual guarantor and claimant. If the entrepreneur's business judgment proves faulty, and the business operates at a loss, the entrepreneur stands ready to draw on his or her personal wealth to satisfy the claims of the firm's employees and creditors. The entrepreneur is a fully responsible owner; stated in legal terms, the entrepreneur has unlimited liability. On the other hand, if the entrepreneur's judgment proves sound, and profits result, even immense profits, these rewards all belong to the entrepreneur. They are his or her just desserts for taking the risks of responsible ownership.

Consider the example of Mary, who decides to start a new business-a wholesale bakery, which she will own and operate as a sole proprietorship. Mary will be the bakery firm's entrepreneur. In deciding to start her business, and thereafter in running the business from day to day, Mary must solve innumerable problems. Being able to solve these problems, and being responsible if the problems are not solved, is the essence of being an entrepreneur. Some problems will be routine, but many will be complex and require forecasting. Mary must determine what bakery products her business can profitably offer to the market. She must determine how to house, equip, staff, supply, and finance her business. To solve each of these problems a certain amount of knowledge, business judgment, and skill is required. Moreover, solving these problems often involves convincing others (prospective employees, lenders, or suppliers) to invest their human or money capital in the bakery venture. Thus, Mary must be willing to demonstrate that she is a responsible owner who will make good on her promises. To do this, Mary, as a classical entrepreneur, must be confident enough in her own ability and judgment that she will be willing to be the firm's residual claimant. In other words, Mary will agree that she will pay herself last, and only if the bakery is profitable. Moreover, Mary will agree that if the bakery venture is a failure, she will use her own wealth to make good on the promises she has made to employers, suppliers, and lenders.


[^0]: 1. The modifier "classical" has two connotations. First, the owner-managed firm dominated the economic landscape at the outset of the industrial revolution - the heyday, or "classical" period, of capitalism. Second, the owner-managed firm represents the purest, or most classical, form of economic organization because it avoids the problems of misaligned incentives that arise when authority and responsibility are divided between and among multiple owners, a problem that you will observe in different forms throughout your study of corporations and other business associations.