
## a. The General Partnership and Its Standard Form Internal Governance Rules

UPA (1914) §§6,9,18,21,29,31
UPA (1997) §§105,202,301,306,401,601,801
Partnership law, both judicial and statutory, provides a set of standard form, off-the-rack rules for persons who wish jointly to own and operate a firm. These partnership rules are an amalgam of well-developed common law and equitable doctrines, now largely codified. Every state except Louisiana bases its partnership law on the Uniform Partnership Act ("UPA (1914)") or the Uniform Partnership Act adopted in 1997, as last amended in 2013 ("UPA (1997)"). Four states-New York, Massachusetts, South Carolina, and Georgia - continue to use the UPA (1914) terminology and structure. Many other states have adopted and continue to use the terminology of the UPA 1997 prior to its post-1997 amendments, and five states have now adopted the relatively minor structural and terminological changes included in UPA (1997) by post-1997 amendments. However, state legislation based on any version of the UPA contemplates that courts will continue to provide particularized rules via ex post adjudication to enforce fiduciary duties or otherwise ensure equitable results.

It is quite easy to adopt the standard form rules provided by general partnership law. All that is required is formation of a general partnership. Similar to formation of the principal-agent relationship discussed in Chapter 1, formation of a general partnership requires no written agreement or governmental action or approval. Instead, mutual manifestation of consent to jointly carry on as co-owners a business for profit will subject the co-owners to partnership rules. Therefore, parties may find that they have inadvertently created a partnership and are governed by its rules even though they thought they were in a different relationship. This result is similar to what we observed in Chapter 1, with the inadvertent creation of the principal-agent relationship or the employer-employee relationship. In each of these scenarios, the standard form rule provided by the common law comes with the relationship, whether wanted or not.
As we proceed through this chapter, you will see that the archetypal user of the general partnership form is a small, intimate firm in which each partner participates in all aspects of the business, makes essentially equal contributions to the success of the business, and has substantial confidence in the trustworthiness and skill of fellow partners. The defining characteristics of the general partnership form discussed below are consistent with and reinforce the archetypal partner's expectations but should be varied by contract for non-archetypal users.

Equal sharing of ownership and management functions. A sole proprietor usually performs three ownership and management functions. First, she is the residual claimant and ultimate risk bearer-the person who takes what is left, if anything, after all employees and other creditors have been paid. Second, she oversees the business and affairs of her firm, developing business policies and directing their implementation. Third, the sole proprietor sits at the top of the firm's day-to-day operational hierarchy, empowered to act on behalf of the firm in interactions with the firm's employees, customers, suppliers, and creditors.

General partnership norms distribute these ownership and management functions equally either to each partner or to the partners as a group. Thus, each partner is a residual claimant, has a full and equal right to participate in management of the firm, and has an equal right to act as an agent of the partnership. Partnership law norms also assign to each partner an equal share of profits and an equal responsibility for losses.

Because partners have equal rights in management and profits, general partnership law norms will be most efficient if partners make similar contributions of services and capital. Conversely, tension might develop if some partners contribute only money capital while others contribute only services, or if substantial differences exist in the quality or character of the partners' contributions.

Individual partner's adaptability to changed circumstances favored over firm's continuity and adaptability. In a sole proprietorship, agency and employment law default rules allow the proprietor to adapt to changed circumstances by hiring and firing agents at will, by changing the course or nature of the business at will, and by terminating the firm at will. Normally, a proprietor may so adapt without risk of liability to an agent or employee damaged by the adaptive action.

Under general partnership law default rules, if the partnership wishes to terminate its association with a partner, it may do so only by dissolving the partnership and paying the expelled partner the value of her interest in cash. Thus, adaptation by changing the makeup of the team comes at a price: lack of stability and continuity. For small, unspecialized firms, this is an acceptable price. For firms with more specialized capital, continuity may hold a higher value.

Likewise, general partnership law's decision-making norms sacrifice somewhat the firm's adaptability in favor of each partner's participatory rights. Ordinary decisions may be made by majority vote of the partners. However, extraordinary decisions and changes in the partnership agreement require unanimity. While these rules may seem value-reducing for a complex firm, they reinforce the solidarity that is at the core of the archetypal general partnership whose partners contribute equally to the business and share common interests.
Fiduciary duty. Under common law norms, each partner owes a fiduciary duty to each other to act in the best interest of the joint enterprise. Similar to the fiduciary duties an agent owes a principal under the common law of agency, each partner owes a fiduciary duty of loyalty to other partners. Fiduciary duty reduces the likelihood that one or more partners will misuse their ownership powers or rights through guileful pursuit of individual self-interest. This mutual duty to act fairly and honestly reinforces the notion that the archetypal general partnership is an intimate relation among equals who have combined forces in pursuit of a common good. Many commentators have described fiduciary duty as the defining characteristic of general partnership law. We will have a number of occasions to consider that proposition throughout this chapter.

Dissolution and withdrawal of capital at will. The general partnership is created and continues to exist only when and so long as each partner consents. Accordingly, if one or more partners manifest their unwillingness to continue in the partnership association, the partnership is dissolved, without the necessity of any formal process or government action. Thereafter, business accounts are settled, debtors are paid, and remaining assets are distributed in cash to each partner according to his or her profit share. After dissolution and winding up of the business, each partner may freely redeploy their money and other assets elsewhere. As we see later in this chapter, the dissolution-at-will norm may be consistent with and reinforce solidarity in the archetypal partnership but is challenging to implement when dissolution is not carried out harmoniously. Moreover, non-archetypal relationships may prefer to contract ex ante for different exit rules.

# b. The Joint Venture 

The common law distinguished between general partnerships, wherein business associates carry on a business as co-owners, and joint ventures, wherein business associates jointly own and exploit a particular opportunity while maintaining autonomy as separate businesspersons or entities. Like a general partnership, a joint venture is created by mutual manifestations of consent to jointly pursue a common venture; that mutual manifestation of consent need not be in writing, and the creation of the relationship requires no governmental action or approval.

While the line between a general partnership and a joint venture is not always bright, the label "joint venture" continues to connote a less permanent and less complete merging of assets and interests than does the label "general partnership." For example, a joint venture is defined in Florida Tomato Packers, Inc. v. Wilson, 296 So. 2d 536, 539 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 1974), as the legal relationship between "two or more persons, who, in some specific venture, seek a profit jointly without the existence between them of any actual partnership, corporation, or other business entity."

At common law, partnerships and joint ventures were governed by similar standard form rules of law and that similarity continues as to the applicable internal and external governance rules, even though the joint venture remains solely governed by the common law. However, there may be subtle differences between the rules applied to a joint venture reflecting the limited merging of interests that typically occur in such associations. For instance, third parties may not be able to assume that a joint venturer has inherent agency authority equal to that of a general partner. Moreover, a joint venturer may have greater room to prefer his or her own interests than fiduciary duty allows to a general partner.

An important current use of joint ventures is by larger corporate firms that unite for a single purpose, such as a joint research project or a joint marketing effort. The terms of such relationships are carefully negotiated and specified in written agreements that preserve the separate identity and purposes of the venturers. As you proceed through this chapter, consider why and how two such firms uniting to pursue a joint venture would choose to vary the normal rules provided by general partnership law. Later, as you study corporate law, consider why corporate form would or would not be selected for such single-purpose ventures.

# c. The Limited Partnership 

Delaware Revised Uniform Limited Partnership Act §§ 201, 301, 303, 401,403,801,1105

A limited partnership is a business association composed of one or more general partners and one or more limited partners. Unlike the general partnership and the joint venture, a limited partnership cannot be created without government action. A limited partnership is formed by filing a certificate of limited partnership with the secretary of state or similar authority in the jurisdiction chosen by the parties. While the government agency receiving the filing has only ministerial authority in almost every circumstance, the fact of this modicum of government assent means that the limited partnership is viewed as an entity whose existence is dependent not only on the contractual intentions of its founders but also on the grace of the state.

The defining characteristics of the limited partnership differ markedly from those of the general partnership.

Separation of ownership and management functions. In a limited partnership, ownership and management functions are divided among the firm's general and limited partners. The general partner or partners are the active participants in the firm, exclusively empowered to make and carry out the firm's business policies. In contrast, limited partners have essentially no management power and no authority to act as agents in carrying out the partnership's business. Instead, a limited partner's role is to provide risk capital to the limited partnership in return for a promised share of profits.

Limited liability. General partners in a limited partnership, as in a general partnership, are jointly and severally liable for the firm's obligations. In a sophisticated limited partnership, however, this risk of liability is commonly limited by having the general partner be a limited liability entity, such as an LLC or corporation. Limited partners put at risk only the amount of capital they have invested. If the limited partnership fails and its assets are insufficient to satisfy all of its obligations, a limited partner will lose what they have invested but will not be liable for claims still unsatisfied.
The assets of the general partner or general partners, however, do remain at risk with respect to those remaining unsatisfied claims.

Firm's continuity and adaptability to changed circumstances favored over individual's adaptability. Under limited partnership default rules, a limited partnership is difficult to dissolve. If no time for dissolution is stated in the limited partnership agreement, the partnership is deemed to have perpetual existence. Though the limited partnership can still be dissolved at the will of the partners, the will of one partner is insufficient. For example, in Delaware dissolution at will requires the consent of all of the general partners as well as the consent of limited partners holding collectively two-thirds of the profit shares. Unlike in a general partnership, however, even if dissolution occurs, it does not automatically or necessarily trigger a liquidation of the limited partnership.

# d. The UPA (1997) and Its Innovations 

UPA (1997) §§ 105, 201, 306, 901
Delaware RULPA §§101(9),214
While the UPA (1997) has standard form internal governance rules similar to those created by the common law as codified in the UPA (1914), it changes partnership law in a number of fundamental respects, detailed below.

## (1) THE GENERAL PARTNERSHIP AS A SEPARATE LEGAL ENTITY

The only serious substantive controversy among the key participants in drafting the UPA (1914) was whether to "modernize" general partnership law by treating a partnership as a legal entity separate from its partners. Previously, both federal and state common law had viewed the partnership as an aggregate of its partners. This view had consequences in how title to property was held and transferred and how a partnership could sue and be sued. Since the general partnership was not a legally recognized entity, the signature of every partner might be necessary to transfer real property; likewise, suits by or against a partnership might need to be taken by or against all of the general partners to be fully effective. Defenders of the traditional view won out, and the UPA (1914) continued both the federal and state common law understanding that a partnership had no separate legal identity and was simply an aggregation of the partners. The UPA (1914) did, however, modify the common law so that property could be more easily titled and transferred in the name of the partnership.

The drafters of the UPA (1997) were intent on transforming general partnership law to reflect the entity theory rejected in 1914. Consistent with that goal, §2.01 states that "[a] partnership is an entity distinct from its partners." You will see examples of the execution of that proposition throughout UPA (1997). The most important embodiment of the new entity-theory-based rules are those governing a partner's dissociation from a partnership. As we will see in Part C of this chapter, the new dissociation rules allow partners to contract for entity continuance in most circumstances despite the dissociation of a partner, but they preserve the common law rule that absent such contracting, a partnership at will is automatically dissolved by a partner's dissociation. This example reveals that despite the effort to fashion the general partnership as a more permanent association, the standard internal governance rules remain essentially the same as those codified in the UPA (1914).

# (2) GREATER SPACE FOR FREEDOM OF CONTRACT 

A second goal of the UPA (1997) was to increase the extent to which partnerships could modify the standard form rules of partnership law. This was accomplished by decreasing the immutability of the standard form rules. One example, as illustrated above, was providing more flexibility in varying the rules governing the consequences of a partner's dissociation from the partnership. One of the most controversial changes was to substantially enhance the ability of planners to contract for less stringent fiduciary duty rules. But the most important freedom-of-contract innovation, discussed immediately below, was to provide an easy path for a general partnership to contract around the normal rule that general partners are jointly and severally liable for all of the partnership's obligations.

## (3) LIMITED LIABILITY FOR GENERAL PARTNERS

Under general partnership norms, all partners are jointly and severally liable for all obligations of the partnership and there is no limit on this potential personal liability. Thus, the negligence or misconduct of one partner could result in financial ruin for fellow partners. Unlimited liability is most palatable when each partner will easily be able to monitor the activities of other partners and agents. The 1980s saw a substantial increase in malpractice litigation aimed at accountants, lawyers, and other professionals, most of whose firms were then organized as general partnerships. This phenomenon caused increasing disenchantment with the general partnership form. The resulting political activism by influential business interests led to the universal recognition of the limited liability company, whose members and managers were granted limited liability akin to that afforded limited partners in a limited partnership, a phenomenon and entity that we will study in Chapter 9.

As political support for the limited liability company blossomed, drafters of the UPA (1997) sought to achieve similar treatment for general partners in a general partnership. The chosen device was what is generally described as a new business form - the limited liability partnership - but what in reality is simply a contractual alteration of the normal liability rules that apply to an existing partnership. By filing a Statement of Qualification with the state, a general partnership automatically becomes a limited liability partnership, and its partners thereafter have no liability for the partnership's liabilities.

Drafters of the Revised Uniform Limited Partnership Act piggybacked on this UPA innovation to provide a pathway for general partners in a limited partnership to achieve limited liability. See, for example, Delaware RULPA § 214, which allows a limited partnership to become a limited liability limited partnership by filing a Statement of Qualification as permitted by the UPA (1997).

This limited liability innovation is available to all general partnerships and limited partnerships. However, it is critical to keep in mind that not every partnership will be sophisticated enough to take advantage of this contractual option. Moreover, this innovation is not available to a common law joint venture. And as we move to the next section, perhaps the most critical point to remember is that a person may not even realize that they have created a general partnership and that by doing so they have become jointly and severally liable for the partnership's debts and face other unexpected consequences.
