
Recall our simple bakery example, discussed above. Mary's firm is a sole proprietorship. She is the only owner; she is the entrepreneur. She and she alone has the authority to make and carry out business policies, including hiring, firing, and directing employees. Suppose, however, that Mary needs not only to hire employees and use market transactions to run her bakery, but also to obtain a substantial infusion of capital and management expertise to expand the bakery to serve a larger geographic area. Suppose, further, that the preferred way to obtain these new resources is to combine Mary's bakery with the bakery of a competitor, John, into one firm that will be jointly owned by Mary and John. Joining ownership will result in the functions of the classical owner/entrepreneur being divided between Mary and John in some fashion. The jointly owned firm that Mary and John will create is commonly referred to as a "business association."

Most business associations are organized as a partnership, corporation, or limited liability company (LLC), the business forms that are the primary focus of this book. Each of these business forms provides a legal entity which acts as a sole proprietor for the firm. For example, if Mary and John choose to operate their business association as a corporation, the owner of their business association will not be Mary and John personally, but an artificial legal entity carrying a name (perhaps M \& J Co.) which they select. A central question to consider throughout this course is how law enables these business entities to carry out the functions of a sole proprietor, always assumed to be a natural person, upon which classic economic theory rests.

Business associations run the gamut from firms jointly owned by two persons to multinational organizations whose owners number in the tens of thousands. Firms with a very small number of owners are commonly called "closely held." At the opposite extreme, firms with thousands of capital providers and employees are commonly called "publicly traded" because the ownership interests in such firms are widely traded via stock exchange markets or electronic trading markets that are accessible to the public.
