
We now continue with the law of fiduciary duty, and specifically, the duty of loyalty, which we examine in two classic settings: (1) circumstances in which a director personally takes an opportunity that the corporation later asserts rightfully belonged to it, and (2) transactions between the corporation and the director, commonly called "conflicting-interest transactions."

The core of this fiduciary duty is the requirement that a director favor the corporation's interests over her own whenever those interests are in conflict. As with the duty of care, there is a duty of candor aspect to the duty of loyalty. Thus, whenever a director confronts a situation that involves a conflict between her personal interests and those of the corporation, courts will carefully scrutinize not only whether she has unfairly favored her personal interest in that transaction, but also whether she has been completely candid with the corporation and its shareholders. Indeed, you will see circumstances in which failure to be completely candid is conclusive evidence of breach of the fiduciary duty of loyalty.

Both the corporate opportunity and conflicting-interest transaction settings raise concerns about whether a director has fairly treated the corporation she serves. But who is to make this determination? Traditionally, that role has fallen to courts. Increasingly, however, courts and legislatures are channeling these decisions to internal corporate decision-making bodies, either disinterested directors or disinterested shareholders, with courts left to serve a lesser role. Be alert when reading the cases and statutory materials in this section to the level of judicial scrutiny. Is it the relatively restrained business judgment rule review or the more intrusive strict scrutiny evaluation of the entire fairness of the transaction?
