
MBCA ยง 6.01
Delaware G.C.L. ยง 151
In the introductory discussion above, we referred to the stockholders as a corporation's residual claimants and, as such, entitled to periodic dividends and upon dissolution entitled to the assets remaining after more senior claims have been satisfied. This is an accurate description of the collective rights of a corporation's shareholders, but it masks the fact that not all shareholders may have the same rights.

A corporation may have one or more classes of stock. Whether a corporation has one class of stock or multiple classes of stock, statutory rules require that all shares of a given class will be fungible-that is, they will have identical rights, preferences, and limitations. But between classes of stock, rights can be varied.

The corporation statutes also specify that there must be a class of stock that carries authority to elect directors and exercise all other shareholder voting rights. There must also be a class that entitles the holders to receive the corporation's net assets upon dissolution. Shares that combine both residual claimant status and voting rights are called "common stock," even if that description applies to more than one class. If a corporation has only one class of stock, then that class necessarily must have full authority to carry out the voting rights granted to shareholders by corporation law and full rights to receive the corporation's net assets upon dissolution; such stock would fit the classical understanding of the term "common stock."

In a very simple venture, like an archetypal two-person partnership, where both investors are contributing equally and expecting to share future profits equally, it may be appropriate to create only one class of stock. For example, if Mary and Jane will each contribute $1,000 to a planned corporate venture, view their future value as participants in the venture equally, and do not foresee needing to add new investors in the future, creating only one class of common stock and distributing half of the shares to Mary and half to Jane will adequately address their contributions and expectations.

For more complex ventures, planners will often find that potential investors will be making dissimilar contributions and have different risk preferences and expectations. Investors who will be the creative, entrepreneurial force in the venture may have expectations very different from investors who will be relatively uninvolved in the day-to-day affairs of the planned venture. As a result, it is often necessary to create more than one class of stock and to adjust the rights of the various classes to gain the desired commitments of money and entrepreneurial effort.

It may be sufficient to create multiple classes of common stock, where each class has identical rights to share in profits but different voting rights. Or it may be necessary to also create what are colloquially called "preferred shares," which give liquidation preferences, or rights to have the corporation repurchase the shares at a future date. Preferred shares may be given guaranteed dividends and enhanced voting rights. They may be given the right to convert into common shares at some future date or upon the happening of a future event. Or shares may be given limited or no voting rights.

For a planner, the corporation provides a tool kit for satisfying almost any possible investor preference. The planner is only limited by her imagination and what the key participants in a venture are willing to accept. Nonetheless, there are certain customary terms and provisions that will be considered and often utilized in creating what is widely described as preferred stock. These commonly understood terms and provisions include the following:
- Dividend promise and preference. Typically, preferred stock is promised an annual dividend in an amount determined as a fixed percentage of a share's offering price, and that dividend is "preferred" in that no dividend may be paid to the common stockholders until the promised dividend has been paid on the preferred stock. However, even though a dividend is contractually promised, it may not be paid in a given year if so doing would make the corporation insolvent, would violate contractual agreements made with other investors or creditors, or, in the directors' business judgment, would otherwise not be in the best interest of the corporation.
- Cumulative versus non-cumulative dividends. If a promised dividend is not paid in whole or in part in a given year, the ultimate consequence to the preferred stockholders depends on whether the dividend promise is "cumulative" "or non-cumulative." It is not unusual for the preferred dividend promise to be cumulative, which means that if not paid in a particular year, the obligation carries over to subsequent years and adds on to the dividends due in subsequent years. If, for example, a corporation has promised dividends that cumulate if unpaid, common stockholders cannot receive a dividend until past arrearages and current-year preferred dividend promises have been paid in full. However, it is also not unusual for preferred stock dividends to be non-cumulative, in which case if not paid in a particular year, the preferred stockholders' rights to that year's dividends are extinguished.
- Liquidation preference. Typically, preferred stock has a liquidation preference equal to its offering price plus any cumulated unpaid dividends. This means that if a corporation is dissolved, its assets sold, and its creditors paid, the remaining cash will be distributed pro rata to the preferred stockholders until they have been paid the promised amount. Normally, if the preferred shareholders are paid in full, any remaining cash will be distributed pro rata to the common stockholders, though it is not unusual to provide that preferred stock will share ratably with the common stock in that final liquidating distribution.

When forming a start-up business association, planners often must determine how to account for the reasonable expectations of investors who will contribute both services and capital and those who will only contribute capital, a problem that is addressed differently under the norm of partnership and corporation law. Partnership law provides that partners share profits equally, and that capital contributors are given a liquidation preference with respect to sums contributed. However, other than their profit shares, partners are not entitled to any compensation in the way of salary or interest for their contributions of services and capital. In the corporation, because the corporation is a separate entity, shareholders who provide services are treated as employees with respect to those human capital inputs, and as such are entitled to compensation. In further contrast to the partnership, if a corporation has only one class of stock, the stockholders share equally, as residual claimants, in any dividends or liquidation distributions, despite differences in amounts contributed. This becomes a problem if some of the original participants are only contributing future services in return for their common stock, while other common stockholders are contributing both capital and services or only capital. It is in these circumstances that traditional preferred stock may be especially useful in ensuring that capital contributions are given similar compensation rights and protections to those who purchase stock for future services only.

Sophisticated business planning is a skill that synthesizes many subjects other than corporation law, including taxation and corporate finance. For a still-classic introduction to the techniques employed by experts, see David Herwitz, Allocation of Stock Between Services and Capital in the Organization of a Close Corporation, 75 Harv. L. Rev. 1098 (1962). For now, as you reflect on the above discussion, seek to deepen your understanding of this point: common stock should be deployed to represent claims to share in the future profits of the business, while preferred shares are best used to account for disproportionate capital contributions; used properly, the common shares should have a near-zero initial value, facilitating easy allocation of those shares as the venturers think appropriate.

# PROBLEM 3-4 

Charlotte is a recent graduate of MIT, where she majored in computer science. Since her junior year in high school, Charlotte has formed a number of small software, computer, and Internet-related businesses.

Angela, also a recent graduate of MIT, has a degree in computer science. Angela's passion is music. She plays several instruments and has been a radio DJ since her high school years.

Davis, a good friend of Angela, is a recent graduate of Tufts, where he majored in history. Davis's passion is the entrepreneurial side of show business. His father produces motion pictures in Los Angeles. Davis has promoted rock concerts since high school.

For several years, Angela and Davis have been discussing forming an Internetrelated entertainment business upon graduation. Recently they invited Charlotte to join the endeavor because they believed that Charlotte possessed essential technology and business start-up expertise that neither Angela nor Davis possessed. In early August, Charlotte, Angela, and Davis (hereafter sometimes collectively referred to as "the Venturers") agreed to join forces to form an entertainment business under the name Hip-Hop.com. The business will be headquartered in Boston.

Each of the Venturers initially expects to be actively involved in most aspects of the business. Charlotte and Davis are both strong willed, and each privately believes her/himself to be the appropriate overall leader of the venture. Despite Angela's close friendship with Davis, Angela believes that Charlotte should be the overall leader. However, Angela is concerned that Charlotte is too much of a loner and could lack the interpersonal skills to head a larger organization. Angela, who likes to be liked by everyone, has not communicated her impressions and concerns to either Charlotte or Davis.

Charlotte has obtained the agreement of her grandfather, "Pop," to invest $50,000 in the business in return for 2.5 percent of the company's stock. Davis has obtained the agreement of Bermuda, a California-based investor who is the parent of a woman Davis once dated, to invest $150,000 in return for 7.5 percent of the company's stock. The agreements with Pop and Bermuda are "tentative" and "informal" and subject to each investor's consultations with personal advisors about legal and other ramifications. Angela and Davis both expect their parents to make small investments within the next two months. Other friends and relatives of the Venturers are also likely to make investments in the $10,000 to $20,000 range.

The Venturers reached the following understandings at an informal meeting on August 25, 2021:

1. They will form a corporation named Hip-Hop.com. Charlotte has volunteered you, her older sibling, to do the legal work for free.
2. Charlotte will use the title Chief Operating Officer and/or Chief Technology Officer. Angela will use the title President and/or Chief Financial Officer. Davis will use the title Vice President for Corporate Planning and/or Managing Director of the Music Division. The Venturers will constitute the corporation's initial board of directors.
3. Among the three Venturers, the stock of Hip-Hop.com initially will be divided as follows: Charlotte will own 40 percent; Davis will own 30 percent; Angela will own 20 percent. [Charlotte's comment to you: Davis is bitter about this allocation. Originally shares were to be divided equally. Charlotte subsequently demanded 50 percent, but agreed to accept 40 percent after Angela intervened. Charlotte is worried about Davis teaming up with Angela at some future date.] The stock will be sold to the Venturers in return for the expenses they have each incurred in promoting the business-costs of business phone calls, trips, etc.-which for each Venturer is more than $200, but less than $500. The Venturers expect that they will then need to raise additional capital every three months or so by selling stock to additional investors. They realize that such sales will dilute the ownership percentages of initial investors.
4. The Venturers expect that it will take four years to build Hip-Hop.com into a premier Internet business. At that time, they hope to cash in their investment via sale of the business or portions thereof. In order to be sure that each of the Venturers "earns" his or her share of the business, they have agreed that each Venturer's stock will "vest" as follows:
a. One-quarter of each Venturer's initial stock will vest on September 1, 2022, if the Venturer is still working for Hip-Hop.com on that date.
b. An additional one-quarter of each Venturer's initial stock will vest on September 1, 2023, if the Venturer is still working for Hip-Hop.com on that date.
c. An additional one-quarter of each Venturer's initial stock will vest on September 1, 2024, if the Venturer is still working for Hip-Hop.com on that date.
d. The final one-quarter of each Venturer's initial stock will vest on September 1, 2025, if the Venturer is still working for Hip-Hop.com on that date.

If a Venturer ceases to work for Hip-Hop.com prior to September 1, 2025, for whatever reason, then any unvested stock of that Venturer will be "sold back" to the firm or "voided" at nominal or no cost to the firm.
Ignoring professional responsibility issues concerning your representation of multiple parties:

1. Prepare a Certificate/Articles of Incorporation to incorporate Hip-Hop.com in Delaware (or an MBCA jurisdiction) that meet the needs and expectations of the various Venturers and investors. (Be sure that you identify the number and types of shares to be issued.)
2. Prepare a recommendation as to how many shares should be initially issued and how those shares should be allocated among the Venturers and investors.
3. Prepare a brief memo to yourself identifying matters to be addressed in the bylaws or a separate agreement.
