
Most state corporation law norms take the form of default rules-for example, that all shares have the same voting and economic rights or that centralized power resides in the board. Often, however, the default rules may not fit the needs of a particular enterprise or group of entrepreneurs. As in the case of Charlotte's venture in Problem 3-4, it may be important to provide assurances to one or more participants against centralized power and majority rule, for example, to give each participant a veto as to certain key decisions rather than being governed strictly by majority rule. A planner for the enterprise will want to understand how to change these default rules. Most (though not all) of these state-provided rules may be changed by private ordering, such as shareholders' agreements (discussed in Chapter 8). Alternatively, as explored here, the corporate law default rules may be changed by inclusion of the preferred rule in the articles of incorporation or bylaws. These two types of governance documents, which are akin to a constitution and statutes in our public government, differ as to which corporate participants enact them and how difficult it is to amend them once in place. Articles are public documents that may be changed only by action of a corporation's directors and shareholders. Bylaws often may be changed by the directors alone and are not publicly filed documents.

## a. Overview of Normal Rules of Shareholder Voting for Election of Directors

MBCA §§ 8.04, 7.21, 7.28
Delaware G.C.L. $\S \S 141(\mathrm{~d}), 212(\mathrm{a}), 214,216$
The default rules governing shareholders' ability to elect directors are straightforward. Directors are annually elected by plurality vote, according to votes cast on a "one vote per share" basis. (Majority voting, an alternative increasingly being used in public corporations, is discussed later in this chapter.) The number of directors is usually specified in the initial articles or bylaws. Assume, for example, a publicly traded Delaware corporation, Hypo, Inc., having 1 million common shares outstanding. The certificate of incorporation provides for nine directors. Under normal default rules, all nine directors will serve a one-year term. At each annual meeting, an election will be held to fill all nine positions. Each shareholder will be entitled to cast votes equal to her number of shares for each of nine candidates. The nine candidates receiving the most votes will be elected. This is called straight voting, in contrast to cumulative voting described below. The practical result is that a shareholder with 51 percent of the votes will be able to elect 100 percent of the board seats, a result that reflects the majoritarian preference of the default rules in almost all corporation's codes. What if an investor, as in Charlotte's venture described above, desires some assurance of a place at the boardroom table even if investing less than 51 percent, or put another way, will any of the investors in Charlotte's problem worry that the other investors might later combine in alliance against him or her and use that majority power to exclude the investor from the board of directors? The following paragraphs describe ways that corporate planners can change the number of votes so as to respond to the needs of particular investors - for example, to ensure a board seat in particular circumstances or to provide a better chance for a particular investor to obtain a board seat.

# b. Class Voting 

MBCA §§ 8.04, 7.21, 7.28
Delaware G.C.L. $\S \S 141(\mathrm{~d}), 212(\mathrm{a}), 214,216$
Corporate planners have substantial flexibility to allocate voting rights between different classes of stock as they see fit. The default rule under state law is that each share is entitled to a single vote (this is known as the "one share, one vote" rule). However, companies can depart from this default by separating shareholders into two (or more) classes and giving one class more or less voting power relative to its capital contribution to the corporation. A typical dual-class arrangement is as follows: the company's controllers retain a class of high-voting common stock that has 10 or 100 votes per share (or some other number designated in the articles), while offering low-voting common stock to the public that has one vote per share. Such a structure maintains insider control of the corporation, while giving outside investors the majority of the shareholders' equity.

Other permutations are also possible. For example, the New York Times has publicly traded Class A stock, as well as Class B stock that is held by the Ochs-Sulzberger family. The holders of the Class A stock are entitled to vote for four directors, and the Class B shareholders vote for the other nine. It is also common to provide preferred shares with no voting right, or voting rights that are triggered only by a subsequent event, such as the corporation's financial difficulty or the occasion of a major corporate decision, such as whether to sell the company.

The ability to grant a minority equity owner voting control over a corporation appears at odds with the role of the shareholder franchise in corporate law. Indeed, the right to elect directors and vote on other fundamental business matters is central to the shareholder governance role. As Chancellor Allen explained in Blasius Industries, Inc. v. Atlas Corp., affect security prices as to create an incentive for altered managerial performance), or they may vote to replace incumbent board members.

It has, for a long time, been conventional to dismiss the stockholder vote as a vestige or ritual of little practical importance. It may be that we are now witnessing the emergence of new institutional voices and arrangements that will make the stockholder vote a less predictable affair than it has been. Be that as it may, however, whether the vote is seen functionally as an unimportant formalism, or as an important tool of discipline, it is clear that it is critical to the theory that legitimates the exercise of power by some (directors and officers) over vast aggregations of property that they do not own. Thus, when viewed from a broad, institutional perspective, it can be seen that matters involving the integrity of the shareholder voting process involve consideration not present in any other context in which directors exercise delegated power.

564 A.2d 651, 659 (Del. Ch. 1988).
The practice of issuing shares with differential voting rights is controversial, and outside investors generally disfavor it. And yet state law does not impede dual-class contracting - every state allows business planners to depart from the one share, one vote default and allocate differential voting rights to classes of investors. Business planners may even issue shares that deprive investors of any voting rights at all. What are the advantages of dual-class shares? Why might investors oppose them?

# PROBLEM 3-5 

Micro, Inc., a start-up high-tech venture, has 5 million outstanding shares currently held by 24 sophisticated investors and newly hired CEO Jan Stark (who owns 1,000 shares). Micro is negotiating with value investor Bill Door to obtain muchneeded equity capital. Door is willing to purchase 3 million Micro shares (additional shares that are to be issued by Micro in exchange for the new funds) if he is given the ability to elect four of the nine members of the board. Stark has told the board that she favors the deal but will quit unless the board gives her one-third of the voting power in the election of the board majority. How may the board (which has the full support of the shareholders) satisfy Door and Stark, while protecting the interests of the corporation and its other shareholders?

## c. Cumulative Voting

MBCA § 7.28
Delaware G.C.L. § 214
California Corporation Code § 708
In a cumulative voting scheme, a shareholder may cast a total number of votes equal to the number of shares multiplied by the number of positions to be filled, and these votes can be spread among as many candidates as there are seats to be filled or concentrated in as few as one candidate. Thus, if a shareholder owns 100 shares in a corporation with one vote per share and three directors are being elected, he may divide 300 votes among the candidates as he chooses. If he wishes, he may cast all 300 votes for one candidate, in contrast to straight voting, which would permit him to cast only 100 votes for each of three candidates. This cumulation thus increases the likelihood that his candidate will be one of the top three vote-getters; indeed, the purpose of cumulative voting is to permit some minority shareholders to have a place on the board.

A simple example illustrates the difference between these voting schemes. Suppose Knox owns 15 of the 100 outstanding shares of Products, Inc. and wishes to see Amber elected as one of the corporation's nine directors. If Products, Inc.'s other shareholders do not want to see Amber elected, then they may cast votes for nine other candidates. Each of these candidates would then receive 85 votes. Under straight voting, Knox would be unable to elect Amber because Knox may cast only 15 votes for Amber. Under cumulative voting, however, Knox could cast all of Knox's 135 votes ( 15 shares multiplied by 9) for Amber. This would ensure Amber's election no matter how the other shareholders cast their votes. Amber would have enough votes to be in the top nine and thus be elected to the board. The other shareholders would have 765 votes (859), but they cannot divide them in such a way that all nine of their candidates will receive more than the 135 votes that Amber would receive.

The actual mechanics of cumulative voting are much richer than that example. In any given setting your client will want to know how large a minority position must be to be guaranteed gaining a seat on the board, or how many shares an investor must have to gain a particular number of seats on the board. That requires a simple mathematical calculation, although one that will frustrate many law students who may have come to law school to avoid math. The maximum voting power of a given block of shares (i.e., how many seats on the board of directors can be controlled by a given number of shares) can be determined by the following formula. To elect X number of directors, a shareholder must have more than (SX)(D+1) shares, where S equals the number of shares voting and D equals the number of directors to be elected. Thus, in the example in the preceding paragraph, if Bill wished to be assured enough voting power to elect two directors, he would need to own more than (1002) (9+1), or more than 20 shares.

# PROBLEM 3-6 

Protein, Inc. has 6 million outstanding shares. Two million of these shares are held by four institutional investors (the Cabal) who have recently agreed to vote their shares in concert in the upcoming election of Protein's nine-member board. The remaining shares are held by corporate officers, other institutional investors, and approximately 2,000 individuals. None of these shareholders owns more than 1 percent of Protein's shares, and management's holdings are infinitesimal. Assume that Protein's articles provide for cumulative voting, but that such provision has been irrelevant in the past because there have been no contested elections.

Thirty days before the annual meeting, the Cabal notifies Protein that it plans to nominate nine named individuals for election to the board, but that they will not solicit proxies in favor of these nominees. Shortly before the annual meeting, the Cabal notifies the board that the Cabal will vote its shares cumulatively.

Assume, alternatively, that Protein is incorporated in Delaware or an MBCA jurisdiction. If the Cabal votes cumulatively and intelligently, what is the maximum number of directors it can be sure of electing if 1. All four million non-Cabal-owned shares submit proxies in favor of management's nominees?
2. Three million non-Cabal-owned shares submit proxies in favor of management's nominees, and the remaining one million shares are not voted?

# d. A Classified Board with Staggered Terms: Adaptability Versus Stability 

MBCA § 8.06
Delaware G.C.L. § 141(d)
Almost all state corporation codes provide as a norm that directors shall be elected annually. However, these laws expressly allow corporations to adopt longer and staggered terms for directors (and Massachusetts requires a staggered board). For example, MBCA §8.06 allows classification of directors into two or three groups of as equal size as possible. If directors are divided into two groups, then each director serves a two-year term, and if classified into three groups, each director serves a three-year term. The terms of all directors are staggered so that the term of only one group expires each year. Staggered terms theoretically ensure that a corporation will always have experienced directors in office. Absent removal of directors (discussed below), having staggered terms means that two annual meetings would be required to replace a majority of the board of directors. Thus, shareholders-even a majority shareholder-cannot easily change corporate policies simply by electing an entirely new board. Classified boards have proven to be an effective anti-takeover defense in public companies, but their use has been decreasing in recent years amid pressure from some institutional shareholders, a story explored in more detail at the end of this chapter.

In substance, staggering directors' terms operates as a constraint on the majority shareholders' ability to adapt to changed circumstances by quickly naming new directors. It does not mean that the majority will be barred forever from making such changes.

Varying statutory norms to diminish majority power requires careful planning to protect against later amendment by the majority. For example, if X Corporation adopts a provision in its bylaws providing for staggered terms for its nine-member board of directors, what is to prevent the shareholder majority from simply deleting that provision whenever it chooses, thereby declassifying the board? Corporate planners must carefully consider whether the "constitutional" provision should be placed in the corporation's articles or bylaws, as a way to prevent the majority from amending the new rule. This issue is discussed in greater detail in the next section of this book.

## PROBLEM 3-7

Revisit Charlotte's venture in Problem 3-4. How would you change the previous provisions concerning voting rights and the election of directors in light of the material in this subpart 5 ?

[^0]: The shareholder franchise is the ideological underpinning upon which the legitimacy of directorial power rests. Generally, shareholders have only two protections against perceived inadequate business performance. They may sell their stock (which, if done in sufficient numbers, may so