
Philosophical accounts of intellectual property fall into two broad categories. In the first and more common one, theories that have previously been used to justify tangible property are applied and extended to intangible resources. By contrast, in the second, the theories focus less on trying to think of intellectual property as a form of "property," and instead emphasize the specific type of behavior (e.g., copying, counterfeiting) that the intellectual property regime seeks to curtail. Locke's labor theory and Hegel's personhood account exemplify the first category, while Kant's autonomy-based theory remains the best-known justification within the second.

Property-based justifications for intellectual property protection, whether economic or moral, must contend with a fundamental difference between intangible and tangible property. Tangible property, whether land or chattels, is composed of atoms, physical things that can occupy only one place at any given time. This means that possession of a physical thing is necessarily "exclusive"-if I have it, you don't. Indeed, the core of property lies in the right granted to the "owner" of a thing or a piece of land to exclude others from certain uses of it. Settled ownership rights in land and goods are thought to prevent both disputes over who can use the property for what purpose, and the overuse of property that would result if everyone had common access to it.

Intangibles, though, do not have this characteristic of excludability. If I know a particular piece of information, and I tell it to you, you have not deprived me of it. Rather, we both possess it. The fact that the possession and use of intangibles such as information is largely "nonrivalrous" is critical to intellectual property theory because it means that the traditional economic justification for tangible property does not fit intellectual property. In the state of nature, there is no danger of overusing or overdistributing information, and no danger of fighting over who gets to use it. Everyone can use the information without diminishing its value.

Theorists have therefore turned elsewhere to justify exclusive rights in intangibles. Over the course of human history, numerous theories have been put forth to explain intellectual property protection. The principal basis for such protection in the United States is the utilitarian or economic incentive framework. Nonetheless, other theoriesmost notably the natural rights and personhood justifications-have been important in understanding the development and scope of intellectual property law, both here and abroad. The four sections that follow examine different philosophical theories. In reading them, consider how each might apply to the creation of rights and ownership interests in intangibles.
# 1. Historical Background 

## John Locke <br> TWO TREATISES ON GOVERNMENT <br> Third Edition, 1698

Though the earth and all inferior creatures be common to all men, yet every man has a "property" in his own "person." This nobody has any right to but himself. The "labour" of his body and the "work" of his hands, we may say, are properly his. Whatsoever, then, he removes out of the state that Nature hath provided and left it in, he hath mixed his labor with it, and joined to it something that is his own, and thereby makes it his property. It being by him removed from the common state Nature placed it in, it hath by this labour something annexed to it that excludes the common right of other men. For this "labour" being the unquestionable property of the labourer, no man but he can have a right to what that is once joined to, at least where there is enough, and as good left in common for others.

He that is nourished by the acorns he picked up under an oak, or the apples he gathered from the trees in the wood, has certainly appropriated them to himself. . . . That labour put a distinction between them and common. . . . And will any one say he had no right to those acorns or apples he thus appropriated because he had not the consent of all mankind to make them his? Was it a robbery thus to assume to himself what belonged to all in common? If such a consent as that was necessary, man had starved, notwithstanding the plenty God had given him. We see in commons, which remain so by compact, that it is the taking any part of what is common, and removing it out of the state Nature leaves it in, which begins the property, without which the common is of no use. And the taking of this or that part does not depend on the express consent of all the commoners. . . .

It will, perhaps, be objected to this, that if gathering the acorns or other fruits, of the earth, etc., makes a right to them, then any one may engross as much as he will. To which I answer, Not so. The same law of Nature that does by this means give us property, does also bound that property too. . . . As much as any one can make use of to any advantage of life before it spoils, so much he may by his labor fix his property in. Whatever is beyond this is more than his share, and belongs to others. . . .

As much land as a man tills, plants, improves, cultivates, and can use the product of, so much is his property. He by his labor does, as it were, enclose it from the common. . . . Nor was this appropriation of any parcel of land, by improving it, any prejudice to any other man, since there was still enough and as good left, and more than the yet unprovided could use. So that, in effect, there was never the less left for others because of his enclosure for himself. For he that leaves as much as another can make use of does as good as take nothing at all.
# COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS 

1. How do Locke's theories of real property apply to intellectual property? Should we treat the two as the same for ownership purposes? What would Locke say about the exclusive rights granted by the patent laws, to prevent others from using the claimed invention for up to 20 years, whether or not they discovered the invention on their own? Surely if Locke considered the working of land and raw materials to be "labor" that justified ownership of the resulting product, he would have considered labor toward the creation of a new idea - the "sweat of the brow"-to be equally deserving of protection. Or do the differences between real and intellectual property mean that Locke's arguments shouldn't apply to intellectual property?

Should it matter whether Locke's hypothetical creator was the only one likely to come up with his particular invention or discovery? If others would have discovered the same phenomenon a few years (or a few weeks) later, does Locke's argument for property rights lose its force? We might distinguish between a Lockean theory of copyright, which prevents copying, and an effort to justify patent law, which precludes even independent invention and therefore restricts the labor of others.

For illumination on these and related points, see Edwin C. Hettinger, Justifying Intellectual Property, 18 Phil. \& Pub. AfF. 31 (1989). Hettinger critiques the major theories of intellectual property rights. As to Lockean labor theory, Hettinger observes:
[A]ssuming that labor's fruits are valuable, and that laboring gives the laborer a property right in this value, this would entitle the laborer only to the value she added, and not to the total value of the resulting product. Though exceedingly difficult to measure, these two components of value (that attributable to the object labored on and that attributable to the labor) need to be distinguished. ...

Property rights in the thing produced are . . . not a fitting reward if the value of these rights is disproportional to the effort expended by the laborer. "Effort" includes (1) how hard someone tries to achieve a result, (2) the amount of risk voluntarily incurred in seeking this result, and (3) the degree to which moral considerations played a role in choosing the result intended. The harder one tries, the more one is willing to sacrifice, and the worthier the goal, the greater are one's deserts.
Id. at 37, 41-42. Robert Nozick made the first point by means of reductio ad absurdum: he asks whether the owner of a can of tomato juice who dumps it into the ocean can thereafter claim ownership of all the high seas. See ROBERT NOZICK, ANARCHY, STATE AND UTOPIA 175 (1984).

Doesn't Locke justify taking something only if you can make productive use of it? Many patent suits today are filed by "non-practicing entities" who don't make products themselves, but sue those who do. Should a Lockean approach to IP require that the owner make productive use of the right?
2. An application of the Lockean approach with an especially detailed consideration of the Lockean "proviso" (i.e., that "as much and as good" be left for others after appropriation) can be found in Wendy J. Gordon, A Property Right in Self- Expression: Equality and Individualism in the Natural Law of Intellectual Property, 102 Yale L.J. 1533 (1993). The proviso poses a problem we will see throughout the course: how to delimit the rights of a creator in the face of claims by consumers and other members of the public at large.

Professor Gordon challenges the extreme view taken by some commentators that a creator's rights should be absolute. The absolutist view proceeds from the idea that since the creator is solely responsible for the creation, no one is harmed if the creation is withheld from the public entirely. And since the creator can withhold it entirely, he or she can naturally restrict its availability in any manner, including a high price or conditions on its purchase. See John Stuart Mill, Principles of Political ECONOMY 142 (1872). Through the examination of various examples-such as the Church of Scientology's efforts to restrain books critical of its teachings, West Publishing's suit to enjoin Lexis from offering page numbers corresponding to West's case reports, and Disney's efforts to prevent bawdy parodies of its images that ridicule sanitized popular culture-Gordon suggests that, sometimes at least, the public can be worse off if a creation is offered and then limited in its use than it would have been had the creation never been made.
3. Robert Nozick's Anarchy, State and Utopia (1984) offers a different philosophical perspective on intellectual property rooted in the libertarian tradition. It is not clear how libertarians should think of intellectual property rights. On the one hand, ownership of property seems necessary to the market exchange that is at the heart of the libertarian model of society. On the other hand, one might view the free flow of information unfettered by property rights as the norm, and view government-enforced intellectual property rights as an unnecessary aberration.
4. Moral rights are strongly emphasized in the continental European justifications for intellectual property. Those justifications to some extent parallel Locke's arguments, but there are important differences. Continental scholars emphasize the importance of reputation and noneconomic aspects of intellectual property, factors that lead them to support moral rights in copyright law. Professor Alfred Yen presents a thorough account of the role of natural rights in American copyright law. See Alfred Yen, Restoring the Natural Law: Copyright as Labor and Possession, 51 OHIO St. L.J. 517 (1990).
# PROBLEM I-1 

You are a botanist exploring a remote region of a small tropical country. You stumble across a field of strange flowers that you have never encountered before. The tribespeople tell you that they use the flower to heal various ailments by rubbing its petals on the skin and chanting a healing prayer. You pluck one of the flowers and when you return to your campsite that night, you show it to a fellow explorer who is an expert in biochemistry. The biochemist smells the flower and says that it is vaguely reminiscent of Substance P. Substance P is a medicine widely used to treat a variety of serious diseases. She tells you that Substance P is easy to detect: It turns bright yellow when exposed to intense heat. That evening, you put the flower over the campfire and, sure enough, it turns bright yellow. When you return home, you work for months to isolate the active ingredient in the flower. It is not Substance P, but a close structural analog. In chemical experiments, the extract shows great promise for fighting many of the diseases that Substance P can treat without Substance P's dreaded side effects.

What rights, if any, should you have in this discovery and research? Should those rights prevent anyone else from going back to the tropical country, finding the flower, and isolating the chemical you have discovered?

You make a profit selling your medicine throughout the world, including to the native tribespeople of the tropical country. John, a chemist in your company, is angered by this policy. Your formula is a carefully guarded secret, but John publishes it in THE NEW ENGLAND JOURNAL OF MEDICINE. A nonprofit organization begins producing the medicine and selling your product to the native tribespeople at a discount. The organization advertises that it is selling your medicine for pennies a year. Should you be able to stop them from selling your medicine? Should you be able to stop them from using the name of your medicine in their ads?

You have named your medicine "Tropicurical." To advertise the product, one of the employees in your advertising department writes a song based on the very distinctive sounds of the wind in the inland coves of the country mixed with the native birds' calls. The tribespeople of the tropical country have a song that sounds remarkably similar to your advertising tune. The song is important to their tribal identity, and they argue that it is inappropriate to use their distinctive tribal song to commercialize your product. They ask you to stop using it. Should they be able to stop you from using the name or song?

When you refuse to stop using the Tropicurical song to advertise your product, the tribespeople write a new version of their song entitled "Tropicursical" with angry lyrics claiming that your product destroys culture. Should you be able to stop them from singing the song? National Geographic records the tribespeople singing "Tropicursical." The recording plays as part of the news report on their television show. It is also available for download on National Geographic's website. Individuals download copies of the song and e-mail it to their friends. It spreads like wildfire over the Internet, and eventually popular radio stations play it over the air. Should you be able to stop these copies and performances?
# 2. The Personhood Framework 

## Margaret Jane Radin Property and Personhood 34 STANFORD LAW REVIEW 957 (1982)

This article explores the relationship between property and personhood, a relationship that has commonly been both ignored and taken for granted in legal thought. The premise underlying the personhood perspective is that to achieve proper self-development-to be a person-an individual needs some control over resources in the external environment. The necessary assurances of control take the form of property rights. Although explicit elaboration of this perspective is wanting in modern writing on property, the personhood perspective is often implicit in the connections that courts and commentators find between property and privacy or between property and liberty. In addition to its power to explain certain aspects of existing schemes of property entitlement, the personhood perspective can also serve as an explicit source of values for making moral distinctions in property disputes and hence for either justifying or criticizing current law. . . .

In what follows I shall discuss the personhood perspective as Hegel developed it in Philosophy of Right, trace some of its later permutations and entanglements with other perspectives on property, and try to develop a contemporary view useful in the context of the American legal system. . . .

## I. Property for Personhood: An Intuitive View

Most people possess certain objects they feel are almost part of themselves. These objects are closely bound up with personhood because they are part of the way we constitute ourselves as continuing personal entities in the world. They may be as different as people are different, but some common examples might be a wedding ring, a portrait, an heirloom, or a house.

One may gauge the strength or significance of someone's relationship with an object by the kind of pain that would be occasioned by its loss. On this view, an object is closely related to one's personhood if its loss causes pain that cannot be relieved by the object's replacement. If so, that particular object is bound up with the holder. For instance, if a wedding ring is stolen from a jeweler, insurance proceeds can reimburse the jeweler, but if a wedding ring is stolen from a loving wearer, the price of a replacement will not restore the status quo-perhaps no amount of money can do so.

The opposite of holding an object that has become a part of oneself is holding an object that is perfectly replaceable with other goods of equal market value. One holds such an object for purely instrumental reasons. The archetype of such a good is, of course, money, which is almost always held only to buy other things. A dollar is worth no more than what one chooses to buy with it, and one dollar bill is as good as another. Other examples are the wedding ring in the hands of the jeweler, the automobile in the hands of the dealer, the land in the hands of the developer, or the apartment in the hands of the commercial landlord. I shall call these theoretical opposites-property that is bound up with a person and property that is held purely instrumentally-personal property and fungible property respectively. . . .

# III. Hegel, Property, and Personhood 

## A. Hegel's Philosophy of Right

. . . Because the person in Hegel's conception is merely an abstract unit of free will or autonomy, it has no concrete existence until that will acts on the external world. . . . Hegel concludes that the person becomes a real self only by engaging in a property relationship with something external. Such a relationship is the goal of the person. In perhaps the best-known passage from this book, Hegel says:

The person has for its substantive end the right of placing its will in any and every thing, which thing is thereby mine; [and] because that thing has no such end in itself, its destiny and soul take on my will. [This constitutes] mankind's absolute right of appropriation over all things.
Hence, "property is the first embodiment of freedom and so is in itself a substantive end."...

Hegel seems to make property "private" on the same level as the unit of autonomy that is embodying its will by holding it. He argues that property is private to individuals when discussing it in the context of the autonomous individual will and that it is essentially common within a family, when discussing it in the context of the autonomous family unit. He does not make the leap to state property, however, even though his theory of the state might suggest it. For Hegel, the properly developed state (in contrast to civil society) is an organic moral entity. . . . and individuals within the state are subsumed into its community morality. . . .

## B. Hegel and Property for Personhood

[A] theory of personal property can build upon some of Hegel's insights. First, the notion that the will is embodied in things suggests that the entity we know as a person cannot come to exist without both differentiating itself from the physical environment and yet maintaining relationships with portions of that environment. The idea of embodied will, cut loose from Hegel's grand scheme of absolute mind, reminds us that people and things have ongoing relationships which have their own ebb and flow, and that these relationships can be very close to a person's center and sanity. If these relationships justify ownership, or at least contribute to its justification, Hegel's notion that ownership requires continuous embodiment of the will is appealing.

Second, Hegel's incompletely developed notion that property is held by the unit to which one attributes autonomy has powerful implications for the concept of group development and group rights. Hegel thought that freedom (rational self-determination) was only possible in the context of a group (the properly organized and fully developed state). Without accepting this role for the state, one may still conclude that in a given social context certain groups are likely to be constitutive of their members in the sense that the members find self-determination only within the groups. This might have political consequences for claims of the group on certain resources of the external world (i.e., property).
Third, there may be an echo of Hegel's notion of an objective community morality in the intuition that certain kinds of property relationships can be presumed to bear close bonds to personhood. If property in one's body is not too close to personhood to be considered property at all, then it is the clearest case of property for personhood. The property/privacy nexus of the home is also a relatively clear case in our particular history and culture. . . .
[T]he personhood theory helps us understand the nature of the right dictating that discrete units [i.e., an undivided, individual asset] ought to be protected.

An argument that discrete units are more important than total assets takes the following form. A person cannot be fully a person without a sense of continuity of self over time. To maintain that sense of continuity over time and to exercise one's liberty or autonomy, one must have an ongoing relationship with the external environment, consisting of both "things" and other people. One perceives the ongoing relationship to the environment as a set of individual relationships, corresponding to the way our perception separates the world into distinct "things." Some things must remain stationary if anything is to move; some points of reference must be constant or thought and action is not possible. In order to lead a normal life, there must be some continuity in relating to "things." One's expectations crystallize around certain "things," the loss of which causes more disruption and disorientation than does a simple decrease in aggregate wealth. For example, if someone returns home to find her sofa has disappeared, that is more disorienting than to discover that her house has decreased in market value by 5%. If, by magic, her white sofa were instantly replaced by a blue one of equal market value, it would cause no loss in net worth but would still cause some disruption in her life.

This argument assumes that all discrete units one owns and perceives as part of her continuing environment are to some degree personal. If the white sofa were totally fungible, then magically replacing it with a blue one would cause no disruption. In fact, neither would replacing it with money. . . .

But the theory of personal property suggests that not all object-loss is equally important. Some objects may approach the fungible end of the continuum so that the justification for protecting them as specially related to persons disappears. They might just as well be treated by whatever general moral rules govern wealth-loss at the hands of the government. If the moral rules governing wealth-loss correspond to Michelman's utilitarian suggestion-government may take whatever wealth is necessary to generate higher welfare in which the individual can confidently expect to share-then the government could take some fungible items without compensation. In general, the moral inquiry for whether fungible property could be taken would be the same as the moral inquiry for whether it is fair to impose a tax on this particular person.

On the other hand, a few objects may be so close to the personal end of the continuum that no compensation could be "just." That is, hypothetically, if some object were so bound up with me that I would cease to be "myself" if it were taken, then a government that must respect persons ought not to take it. If my kidney may be called my property, it is not property subject to condemnation for the general public welfare.
Hence, in the context of a legal system, one might expect to find the characteristic use of standards of review and burdens of proof designed to shift risk of error away from protected interests in personal property. For instance, if there were reason to suspect that some object were close to the personal end of the continuum, there might be a prima facie case against taking it. That prima facie case might be rebutted if the government could show that the object is not personal, or perhaps that the object is not "too" personal compared with the importance to the government of acquiring that particular object for social purposes.

# COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS 

1. How well does Professor Radin's theory of real property apply to intellectual property? Can an individual be so "bound up" in their inventions or works of authorship that their loss would occasion more than economic damage? Does it affect your answer that intellectual property can be used simultaneously by many people without depleting its functional value to anyone-so that an author's "loss" is not the physical deprivation of stolen chattels, but the less personal fact that someone else has copied her work? Is this more like giving blood than donating a kidney?

It may be that the investment of "personhood" in intellectual property varies greatly, both with the type of intellectual property at issue and with the time and effort the owner put into developing it. For example, an author may feel more connected to a novel on which she has worked for several years than to a massive software program for navigating a jumbo jet or a company's customer list. Should the law take account of these differences, giving greater protection to more personal works? For a critique of Radin's broader personhood perspective, see Stephen J. Schnably, Property and Pragmatism: A Critique of Radin's Theory of Property and Personhood, 45 StAN. L. REV. 347 (1993) (challenging Radin's appeal to consensus and arguing that this focus obscures issues of power and the like).

In other work, Professor Radin addresses forms of property that should not be subject to market exchange at all. See Margaret Jane Radin, Market-Inalienability, 100 HARv. L. REV. 1849 (1987).
2. Personhood theories of IP rights focus on the connection between the creator's identity and the thing created. But consumers too may identify with creative works. Indeed, Radin's example of the couch suggests that buyers too have an identity interest bound up with the things they own (or, perhaps, read). How should the law take that interest into account? Does it suggest that we need to give broader scope for usergenerated content like fan fiction and videos that incorporate literary characters or songs? Or might it suggest the opposite - that consumers have an interest in the purity of their iconic works, free from the unauthorized modification of those works by others? See Justin Hughes, "Recoding" Intellectual Property and Overlooked Audience Interests, 77 TEX. L. REV. 923 (1999). Creators are often motivated as much if not more by attribution and fairness than by the prospect of money. See Jessica Silbey, The Eureka Myth: Creators, Inventors, and Everyday Intellectual Property (2014).