
In 1980, Congress established the ex parte reexamination process to enable patent owners and third parties to request the PTO to review the validity of issued patents. See J. Steven Baughman, Reexamination Reexaminations: A Fresh Look at the Ex Parte and Inter Partes Mechanisms for Reviewing Issued Patents, 89 J. Pat \& Trademark Off. SOC'y 349 (2007); §303(a); PTO Ex Parte Reexamination Rules, 37 C.F.R. §1.515(a). The review process was limited to novelty and nonobviousness and a limited range of prior art (patents and printed publications). The process was conducted ex parte-i.e., only the patent owner participated. And the process could and often did take years to complete. Courts were reluctant to stay enforcement proceedings pending completion of reexamination. Most accused infringers did not consider ex parte reexamination to be a viable alternative to litigation. As a result, the ex parte reexamination was only sparsely utilized.

In 1999, Congress established a more balanced inter partes reexamination procedure which allowed third party challengers to comment on patent owner responses. This procedure also failed to gain much traction. The process was slow and barred challengers from raising any ground that could have been raised during the reexamination during subsequent civil litigation. In 2005, the PTO established the Central Reexamination Unit ("CRU"), which expedited reexaminations and resulted in greater usage of the reexamination. Nonetheless, district courts were still reluctant to stay parallel cases, leading to costly duplication.

As the patent reform efforts gained traction in the post dot-com period, momentum increased for the US to follow the logic of a more robust administrative review process paralleling patent oppositions in the European Patent Office, Patent Review Board (PRB) proceedings in the Chinese Patent Office (SIPO), and similar proceedings around the world. See Joseph Farrell and Robert P. Merges, Incentives to Challenge and Defend Patents: Why Litigation Won't Reliably Fix Patent Office Errors and Why Administrative Patent Review Might Help, 19 BERKELEY TECH. L.J. 9430 (2004). Much of the AIA focused on expanding and expediting review.

The AIA established three principal review procedures: (1) inter partes review (IPR)-inter partes reexamination was phased out and folded into IPR, §§311-19; (2) covered business method review (CBMR)-a transitional review proceeding focused on weeding out dubious business method patents, AIA §18; and (3) post-grant review (PGR), §§321-29. The AIA left ex parte reexamination in place. See §§301-07; Jonathan Tamimi, Breaking Bad Patents: The Formula for Quick, Inexpensive Resolution of Patent Validity, 29 BERKELEY TECH. L.J. 587 (2014). CBMR expired in September 2020. The following table compares the key characteristics of the remaining AIA review systems.
# Administrative Patent Review Proceedings 

| AIA Review | IPR | PGR |
| :--: | :--: | :--: |
| Evidentiary <br> Standard | Petitioner to prove invalidity by the preponderance of the evidence | |
| Grounds for <br> Review | §102,§103 | Any defense relating to invalidity |
| Prior Art <br> Limited to: | Patents and <br> printed publications | No Limits |
| Threshold to <br> Institute <br> Review | Reasonable likelihood that one <br> or more claims is invalid | More likely than not at least one <br> claim is unpatentable, or petition <br> raises a novel legal question of <br> patentability |
| Time to <br> Institution | More than 9 months after <br> issue/reissue or after PGR | w/i 9 months of issue/ reissue date |
| Time to <br> Decision | Maximum of 12-18 months from institution decision | |
| Claim <br> Amendments | Patent owner may cancel claims, or propose a reasonable number of <br> substitute claims; Presumption that only one substitute claim will be <br> required for each challenged claim | |
| Claim <br> Construction | Phillips standard: "ordinary and customary meaning to a person of <br> ordinary skill in the art at the time of the invention" | |
| Stay <br> Considerations: | 1) Stay simplify issues and streamline trial? <br> 2) Is Discovery complete, trial date set? <br> 3) Stay tactically advantage moving party or unduly burden <br> nonmoving party? | |
| Estoppel in <br> Subsequent <br> Civil Action | Any ground raised or reasonably could have been raised | |
| Effect of <br> Settlement | Estoppel provisions do not apply | |
# 1. Post-Grant Review 

The AIA's new Post-Grant Review (PGR) procedure parallels the European-style "patent oppositions." A PGR permits anyone to challenge the validity of a patent within nine months of its issuance (or nine months of a patent reissue). The challenger-or "petitioner," in the words of the statute-may "request to cancel as unpatentable [one] or more claims of a patent on any ground that could be raised" in a district court proceeding. See §321, citing §282 (b) (relating to grounds for invalidity). Unlike preAIA reexamination procedures, which were focused on prior art in the form of patents and printed publications, PGR significantly widens the grounds for challenge, creating in effect a mini-trial on patent validity. A PGR permits evidence of on-sale activities, public uses, prior-filed but not-yet-issued patents, and other types of disclosures, as well as issues such as enablement. See, e.g., Grunenthal Gmbh v. Antecip Bioventures II LLC, Case PGR2017-00008, 2017 WL 2901321 (P.T.A.B. July 7, 2017) (agreeing to institute PGR challenge based on written description and enablement for a pharmaceutical patent, U.S. Pat. No. 9,283,239).

PGRs (as well as other review proceedings) are heard by three administrative patent judge (APJ) panels of the Patent Trial and Appeal Board (PTAB), successor to the preAIA Board of Patent Appeals and Interferences.

Congress expressed its hope that the PGR proceeding would come to be seen as a viable alternative to traditional ex parte reexaminations, and to district court litigation as well:

The initial reexamination statute [in 1980] had several limitations that later proved to make it a less viable alternative to litigation for evaluating patent validity than Congress intended. First, a reexamination request could only be based on prior art, and could not be based on prior public use or prior sales. Moreover, the requestor could not raise any challenge based on §101 (utility, eligibility) or §112 (indefiniteness, enablement, written description, best mode). A third party alleging a patent is invalid, therefore, had fewer challenges it could raise in the proceeding and, therefore, may instead opt to risk infringement and litigate the validity of the patent in court. Second, in the original reexamination system, the third-party challenger had no role once the proceeding was initiated, while the patent holder had significant input throughout the entire process. Third, a challenger that lost at the USPTO under reexamination had no right to appeal an examiner's, or the Patent Board's, decision either administratively or in court. Restrictions such as these made reexamination a much less favored avenue to challenge questionable patents than litigation. Reexamination proceedings are also often costly, taking several years to complete, . . . and are first conducted by examiners and, if the patent is rejected, then by Patent Board judges. Thus, many patents must go through two rounds of administrative review (one by the examiner, and a second by the Patent Board) adding to the length of the proceeding.
Committee on the Judiciary, U.S. Cong., America Invents Act, H.R. REP. No 112-98, 112th Cong., 1st Sess., at 45 (June 1, 2011). The House Report goes on to say:
The Committee believes that this new, early-stage process for challenging patent validity and its clear procedures for submission of art will make the patent system more efficient and improve the quality of patents and the patent system. This new, but time-limited, post-grant review procedure will provide a meaningful opportunity to improve patent quality and restore confidence in the presumption of validity that comes with issued patents in court.
Id. at 48 .

# i. Timing and Sequencing 

PGR requests must be filed within a statutory nine-month "window" after the patent issues. §321 (c). The PTO's regulations accompanying the AIA provide a timeline for PGR proceedings. In general, these proceedings are expected to move quickly in keeping with the notion that a PGR is intended to be a streamlined, cheaper alternative to district court litigation for assessing patent validity.

The PGR process begins with a request from a petitioner.
[T]he petition [must] identify each claim being challenged, the specific grounds on which each claim is challenged, how the claims are to be construed, how the claims as construed are unpatentable, why the claims as construed are unpatentable under the identified grounds, and . . [citations to] evidence relied upon . . . to support the challenge.
USPTO, Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, Changes to Implement Post-Grant Review Proceedings, 77 Fed. Reg. 7060, 7064 (Feb. 10, 2012) (proposing new provision to be codified at 37 C.F.R. §42.204(b)).

The patent owner then has two months to respond. The patent owner may set forth reasons why the PGR should not be instituted, but cannot at this point present new evidence of patentability such as expert declarations. After this filing, the PTO has three months to decide if a PGR is warranted. §324(c).

The Director may not authorize a post-grant review to be instituted unless the Director determines that the information presented in the petition filed under section 321, if such information is not rebutted, would demonstrate that it is more likely than not that at least [one] of the claims challenged in the petition is unpatentable.
An additional criterion is described in §324(b): "The determination required under subsection (a) may also be satisfied by a showing that the petition raises a novel or unsettled legal question that is important to other patents or patent applications." Under §324 (e), the PTO Commissioner's decision whether or not to institute a PGR proceeding is final and non-appealable.

Once a PGR is instituted, the PTO can, by regulation, require the "patent owner [to] file with [a PGR] response, through affidavits or declarations, any additional factual evidence and expert opinions on which the patent owner relies in support of the response." §326(a)(8). The patent owner can respond in a number of ways, including the filing of substituted or amended claims, as long as the new claims (1) find support in the originally filed specification, (2) respond in some way to the ground for the PGR request, and (3) do not broaden the scope of coverage of the original claims. See Proposed Rules to be codified at 37 C.F.R. §§42.220 (b) and (c), 77 Fed. Reg. 7060, 7066. The AIA envisions a focused discovery process in connection with PGR proceedings; "such discovery shall be limited to evidence directly related to factual assertions advanced by either party in the proceeding," and these limits are backed by sanctions "should a party to a PGR misuse discovery to harass or to cause unnecessary delay or an unnecessary increase in the cost of the proceeding. . . " §326(a)(5) and (6).

The limits on discovery are one way that the drafters of the AIA hoped to make PGRs effective but efficient. In general, the goal is for the PTO to reach a final decision in a PGR proceeding within one year of deciding the PGR may proceed. There is the possibility of a six-month extension "for good cause." 77 Fed. Reg. 7060, 7064.

# ii. Coordination with Other Proceedings 

The AIA reduces the burden of parallel proceedings by barring PGR proceedings if a requestor has already filed a civil action. §325(a)(1) If a civil action is filed after a PGR petition, that action will be stayed until the patent owner requests that the stay be lifted or the patent owner files a counterclaim. Furthermore, the AIA authorizes the PTAB to streamline and coordinate different administrative proceedings by consolidating diverse challenges involving a single patent into one proceeding. §315(~d). Pursuant to the AIA's estoppel provisions, any issue that was raised or could reasonably have been raised in a PGR may not be further contested in another PTO proceeding (such as an Inter Partes Review) or in a district court or ITC proceeding. See §§325(e)(1) and (2). In these ways, the AIA PGR process discourages duplicative proceedings and channels validity determinations issues toward the PGR process in the first instance.

Final PGR decisions can be appealed to the Federal Circuit. §329. (PGR institution decisions are not appealable. §324(e) ). It should be noted that even with a very efficient Federal Circuit disposition, a PGR could well run three years through appeal, which is a long time in light of the stated goal of providing an efficient procedure for weeding out weak patent claims.

## 2. Inter Partes Review: Successor to Inter Partes Reexaminations

The new Inter Partes Review (IPR) procedure replaces the Inter Partes Reexamination system. As of September 16, 2012, anyone other than the patent owner may request a review of an issued patent. The requestor must show that there is "a reasonable likelihood that the requester would prevail with respect to at least [one] of the claims challenged in the request." The new IPR system replaces only existing inter partes reexaminations-not the parallel system of ex parte reexamination. Existing ex parte reexamination rules provide a different threshold for initiating a proceeding; ^12

require the proceeding to be conducted by an examiner with a right of appeal to the PTAB; and allow for limited participation by third parties. These ex parte reexaminations were left essentially intact; the new IPR system will run in conjunction with them.

IPRs have become an important part of the patent landscape. By late 2020, there had been over 12,000 IPR petitions filed. Of these, over 3,400 had been instituted and resulted in a Final Written Decision (FWD). At the same time, appeals from PTAB trials at the PTO have quickly become a significant portion of the Federal Circuit's workload. Court data shows that 38% of current Federal Circuit cases are Patent Office appeals. This does include examiner appeals, remaining (pre-AIA) interferences, etc., but the largest portion is appeals from IPRs. For the first time, the U.S. patent system includes an effective and widely-employed post-issuance administrative patent validity hearing, independent from patent infringement litigation in the federal courts. This brings the U.S. into line with other major patent systems. See Robert P. Merges and Haiyan Seagull Song, Transnational Intellectual Property Law 146-153 (2018) (illustrating Patent Review Board cases and their review by Chinese courts); id., at 3637 (overview of European Patent Office oppositions); Colleen Chien, Christian Helmers, and Alfred Spigarelli, Inter Partes Reviews and the Design of Post-Grant Patent Reviews, 33 Berkeley Tech. L.J. 817 (2018) (comparing U.S. IPRs with EPO oppositions and German national court revocation proceedings).

An IPR proceeding is subject to the same limits as to prior art that apply in current reexamination proceedings: only patents and printed publications can be cited to initiate an IPR. See §311 (b). The AIA, in §316(a)(9), permits the patent owner to submit substitute claims, or to cancel claims, in light of an IPR proceeding.

Unlike the PGR process, which can raise any invalidity ground, IPRs may only challenge lack of novelty or obviousness and only on the basis of prior patents or printed publications.

Patents challenged in an IPR proceeding are not subject to the strong presumption of validity that requires clear and convincing evidence to invalidate a patent in court, but benefit only from the lesser preponderance of the evidence standard.

# i. Timing and Sequencing 

The PTAB has plenary authority to decide whether to institute an IPR, precluding an appeal of the decision whether to institute an IPR. Its decision is final and unreviewable. See Thryv v. Click-to-Call Techs., 590 U.S. 45 (2020).

The IPR process was designed to dovetail with the PGR process. Therefore, IPRs cannot be filed until after the PGR filing period (nine months after patent issuance) has passed or until after a PGR proceeding has been completed. Thus, an IPR can follow directly after an unsuccessful PGR request, although it is unlikely such a petition will be successful. §311 (c).
# ii. Coordination with Other Proceedings 

An accused infringer who has been sued by the patentee for patent infringement must file a request to initiate an IPR within one year after the patentee files an infringement action. §315 (b). One additional point to note: though anyone can file an IPR request, a losing party at the PTAB must establish Article III (constitutional) standing in order to challenge a PTAB decision in the Federal Circuit. See, e.g., AVX Corp. v. Presidio Components, Inc., 923 F.3d 1357 (Fed. Cir. 2019) (IPR challenger failed to show injury in fact, and thus lacked standing to appeal PTAB decision; even though the decision to uphold the challenged claims reduced challenger's ability to compete with patent owner, the challenger had no present or non-speculative interest in engaging in conduct even arguably covered by patent claims at issue, and so lacked standing).

IPRs were intended to be a more focused and efficient alternative to district court litigation. Liberal IPR filing rules have permitted some patent challengers-including loose coalitions of independent companies, all of whom are threatened by a single "target" patent-to file numerous IPRs against a single patent. This multiplicity of validity proceedings has proven to be a burden to some patent owners, and has sparked calls for PTO and legislative reforms.

For example, Genentech's patent on "Method for Making Humanized Antibodies," U.S. Patent 6,407,213 (Jun. 12, 2002), has been challenged in no fewer than 16 separate actions. See Spencer J. Johnson, Rothwell Figg's Biosimilar Law Bulletin, Dec. 11, 2018, avail. at https://www.biosimilarsip.com/2018/12/11/claims-of-genentechs-carter-213-patent-found-unpatentable/ (describing two successful IPRs that led to cancellation of 18 claims of the ' 213 patent, plus another IPR that had just been instituted). Although there is a case to be made that any additional challenge to a patent has social benefit, there is also a need to recognize that the marginal value of a fifteenth or twentieth challenge to a patent may be low. The private costs of defending all these challenges might provide strategic leverage to patent challengers, but all this expense might not add much value to society overall. There is value, also, in promoting "title security" for patent owners. That's because many patents are the basis of elaborate contracts and business dealing. Business often engage in patent-based licensing, funding, collaboration, and the like - meaning that "security of title" helps form the foundation for many value-increasing private arrangements. Unlimited patent challenges may undermine these arrangements, adding a hidden social cost to the private burden of defending against fifteen or twenty IPRs. See Robert P. Merges and John F. Duffy, Patent Law and Policy Ch.8(B)(3)(c) ( 8^th ed., 2021) (discussing the notion of patent incontestability).

The AIA seeks to avoid duplicative litigation by estopping an IPR requestor from challenging a patent claim in district court or an ITC enforcement action on the basis of "any ground that the petitioner raised or reasonably could have raised during that inter partes review." §315(e)(2). Similarly, the requestor may not file a second IPR or pursue any other administrative proceeding on any ground that was raised or could have been raised in the IPR. §315(e)(1). And courts have even barred other proceedings, like ex parte reexamination, if they were duplicative of IPR proceedings. In re Vivint, 14 F.4th 1342 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

To facilitate efficiency, the Patent Act permits a court to grant a stay motion, postponing district court litigation while the PTAB decides a parallel IPR. District courts retain substantial discretion over case management. To avoid duplicative proceedings, the PTAB has increasingly refused to institute IPRs if the district court is nearing trial. See, e.g., Apple Inc. v. Fintiv, Inc., No. IPR2020-00019, 2020 WL 2486683, at *5 (P.T.A.B. May 13, 2020) (denying institution "[b]ecause the currently scheduled District Court trial [in the Eastern District of Texas] is scheduled to begin two months before our deadline to reach a final decision, this factor weighs somewhat in favor of discretionary denial in this case.").

The Fintiv approach, however, has led to its own form of gaming. Some district courts, apparently eager to attract patent litigation to their courtroom and district, frequently deny a motion to stay pending IPR petitions. One rationale is that a court which is set up for rapid hearings on validity might finish its work before the IPR is resolved. See, e.g., NHK Spring Co., Ltd. v. Intri-Plex Techs., Inc., No. IPR2018-00752, 2018 WL 4373643, at *4 (P.T.A.B. Sept. 12, 2018) (denying IPR institution because a parallel district court case had set an early trial date, making the IPR perhaps duplicative). The NHK Spring decision has encouraged patent owners to file infringement cases in a "rocket docket" (such as the Western District of Texas), and fend off an IPR stay request by citing NHK. This gamesmanship arguably causes inefficiency and unfairness by channeling invalidity determinations to the more expensive institution, promoting forum shopping, and pressuring defendants to settle by removing IPR invalidation from the table.

# 3. Derivation Proceeding 

By shifting from a first-to-invent to a modified first-to-file priority system, the AIA eliminates the interference proceedings for patents filed after March 15, 2013. Nevertheless, due to concern that unscrupulous claimants might steal an invention and beat the true inventor to the Patent Office by filing first, Congress established a special administrative proceeding to sort out claims that the applicant stole or "derived" an invention from another.

Under AIA §135, a Derivation Proceeding begins when a petitioner alleges that "an inventor named in an earlier application derived the claimed invention from an inventor named in the petitioner's application and, without authorization, the earlier application claiming such invention was filed." AIA §135. The challenge must be brought within one year of the publication of the claim to the invention that the petitioner says was derived (i.e., one year after patent publication, or one year after patent issuance if the application was never published under §122).

## COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS

1. The IPR procedures have proven very popular among accused infringers and district judges. The PTAB hired more than 200 APJs to handle this considerable workload.
2. Constitutionality of IPR. The Supreme Court rejected a constitutional challenge to the IPR proceeding in Oil States Energy Servs. v. Greene's Energy, 584 U.S. 325 (2018). It emphasized that patents were public franchises that implicated public rights, and that the administrative agency that granted those patents should have the power to revoke them.
3. Constitutionality of Appointments Process for PTAB Judges. The Supreme Court ruled in United States v. Arthrex, 594 U.S. 1 (2021), that the AIA's designation of PTAB APJs as inferior "Officers" whose decisions are not reviewable by the Executive branch was unconstitutional. The Court corrected this constitutional defect by holding that the PTO Director "may review final PTAB and, upon review, may issue decisions" on behalf of the Board.


^12 Section 303(a), which applies to ex parte reexaminations, says in part: "[T]he [PTO] Director will determine whether a substantial new question of patentability affecting any claim of the patent concerned is raised by the request," and if so, a reexamination will be instituted. The "substantial new question of patentability" standard is lower than the "reasonable likelihood that the requestor would prevail" standard under the AIA's IPR procedure, which means it should be easier to initiate a reexamination than an IPR.