
Not all use or disclosure of a trade secret is actionable misappropriation. Rather, as the commissioners who drafted the Uniform Trade Secrets Act noted, there are several categories of "proper means" of obtaining a trade secret. These "proper means" do not directly deny the existence of a trade secret or the defendant's use of that secret. Rather, they are legitimate uses of trade secrets by a competitor.

UTSA Comment to ยง1 explains that:
One of the broadly stated policies behind trade secret law is "the maintenance of standards of commercial ethics." RESTATEMENT OF TORTS, Section 757, Comment (f), notes: "A complete catalogue of improper means is not possible," but Section 1(1) includes a partial listing.

Proper means include:
1. Discovery by independent invention;
2. Discovery by "reverse engineering," that is, by starting with the known product and working backward to find the method by which it was developed. The acquisition of the known product must, of course, also be by a fair and honest means, such as purchase of the item on the open market, for reverse engineering to be lawful;
3. Discovery under a license from the owner of the trade secret;
4. Observation of the item in public use or on public display;
5. Obtaining the trade secret from published literature.

See also Restatement (Third) of Unfair Competition ยง43 ("Independent discovery and analysis of publicly available products or information are not improper means of acquisition.").

Kadant, Inc. v. Seeley Machine, Inc.
United States District Court for the Northern District of New York 244 F.Supp.2d 19 (N.D.N.Y. 2003)

HURD, DISTRICT JUDGE:

# II. Facts 

Kadant is a publicly traded corporation with yearly sales eclipsing $100 million. Kadant AES ("AES") is a division of Kadant located in Queensbury, New York. For twenty-eight years, AES has manufactured and sold to customers worldwide products that clean and condition papermaking machines and filter water used in the papermaking process. "There are three main products areas of the business of AES: shower and spray devices and nozzles; foil blades to remove water from the paper during the papermaking process; and structures that hold foils and filters for straining water utilized in the papermaking process so that it can be reused." . . . Plaintiff occupies a dominant place in the national papermaking market.

Corlew was hired by AES in July of 1995 as a machinist. Nearly three years later, in April of 1998, he was promoted to a position in the engineering department. In that capacity, Corlew would be provided with a refined customer order, made by an AES engineer and a customer, and it was his job to create a "manufacturing drawing (with instructions and a bill of materials-i.e., the 'recipe') for the order." In order to create such a drawing, Corlew used a computer assisted drawing machine. The computer assisted drawing machine contained "the recipes for the AES products and generate[d] drawings and bills of materials." Plaintiff contends that AES took steps to protect the secrecy of the information contained in the computer assisted drawing machine. In June of 1999, Corlew was promoted again and now had the responsibility to assist the engineers in designing customer orders. Corlew was terminated in the summer of 2001.

During his tenure at AES, Corlew had access to plaintiff's "recipes" ("design specifications") for its products and to plaintiff's computerized database of prospective customers, which includes "names, addresses, and e-mails for all potential customers in the papermaking industry, including the names of individuals key to these companies' purchasing orders." Plaintiff contends that one of Corlew's final assignments while at AES was to coordinate this database with the database containing information on all current AES customers and their purchasing histories. Corlew had access to AES's entire computer system, which apparently included both databases as well as the computer assisted drawing machine containing the design specifications. At the end of his employment, Corlew's access to AES's computer system was terminated, and his laptop was wiped clean of AES information, and/or access thereto. Throughout his employment with AES, Corlew was subject to a signed confidentiality agreement, in which he agreed not to disclose or use to his benefit any confidential information, including information about AES customers. . . .

Near the end of April of 2002, Corlew began working for Seeley, "developing and marketing a new line of Seeley products for sale to the pulp and papermaking industry." According to defendants, " [t] he products comprising this new line were reverseengineered from existing products, freely available in the public domain and unprotected by published patent applications, in-force patents or trade secrets." According to plaintiff, the only way defendants could have developed and put out for sale this new line of products in so short of time is not by reverse engineering, which it alleges is time consuming, expensive, and requiring technical skill, but by Corlew's theft of AES's trade secrets-its design specifications and the customer databases-and infringement of its trademark.

Specifically, claims plaintiff, using as a frame of reference defendants' own expert, it would take defendants 1.7 years to reverse engineer all of plaintiff's nozzles. Defendants maintain, however, that only a small fraction, not all, of plaintiff's products were reverse engineered. The parties also dispute how much time would be associated with the manufacturing process. . . .

# III. Discussion 

Plaintiff has moved for preliminary injunctive relief pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 52(a). . . .

In order for plaintiff to successfully move for a preliminary injunction, it must demonstrate: 1) a likelihood of irreparable harm if the injunction is not granted; and 2) either a likelihood of success on the merits of its claims, or the existence of serious questions going to the merits of its claims plus a balance of the hardships tipping decidedly in its favor. Bery v. City of New York, 97 F.3d 689, 693-94 (2d Cir. 1996). Because the issuance of a preliminary injunction is a drastic remedy, plaintiff is required to make a "clear showing" of these requirements. See Mazurek v. Armstrong, 520 U.S. 968, 972 (1997). . . .

## B. TRADE SECRET THEFT/MISAPPROPRIATION

## 1. Likelihood of Success on the Merits

To establish misappropriation of a trade secret, a plaintiff must prove: 1) that "it possessed a trade secret; and 2) that defendants are using that trade secret in breach of an agreement, confidence, or duty, or as a result of discovery by improper means." Integrated Cash Management Services, Inc. v. Digital Transactions, Inc., 920 F.2d 171, 173 (2d Cir. 1990); see also Carpetmaster of Latham v. Dupont Flooring Systems, 12 F.Supp.2d 257, 261 (N.D.N.Y. 1998). . . .

# b. Design Specifications 

Secrecy again takes center stage and is dispositive when determining whether plaintiff's product design specifications are entitled to trade secret protection for the purposes of obtaining preliminary injunctive relief. If secrecy is lost when a product is placed on the market, there is no trade secret protection. See LinkCo, 230 F.Supp.2d at 498-99 (collecting cases). The primary issue with respect to this alleged trade secret is whether plaintiff's products could be reverse engineered in the time span between Corlew's hiring at Seeley and defendants' marketing and putting out their products for sale. ^[11] As will be shown, infra, the parties disagree about every material fact that goes toward resolving this debate."

Trade secret law . . . does not offer protection against discovery by . . . so-called reverse engineering[.]" Kewanee Oil Co. v. Bicron Corp., 416 U.S. 470, 476 (1974). However, "the term 'reverse engineering' is not a talisman that may immunize the theft of trade secrets." Telerate Systems, Inc. v. Caro, 689 F.Supp. 221, 233 (S.D.N.Y. 1988). The relevant inquiry is whether the means to obtain the alleged trade secret were proper or "honest," as opposed to being obtained by virtue of a confidential relationship with an employer. See Franke v. Wiltschek, 209 F.2d 493, 495 (2d Cir. 1953); Telerate, 689 F.Supp. at 233. Reverse engineering a product to determine its design specifications is, therefore, permissible so long as the means used to get the information necessary to reverse engineer is in the public domain, and not through the confidential relationship established with the maker or owner of the product.

One court, not satisfied with this distinction, has held that even where a product is out in the public domain, and was thus subject to being reverse engineered by a purchaser, trade secret status remains intact because the defendant's former employment with the plaintiff was the only basis for the defendants being "able to select particular items from a vast sea of public information." See Monovis, Inc. v. Aquino, 905 F.Supp. 1205, 1228 (W.D.N.Y. 1994). This view of the law would effectively eviscerate any benefit reverse engineering would provide in the preliminary injunction analysis as applied to trade secrets, forestall healthy notions of commercial competitiveness, and heavily contribute to an inert marketplace where products can only be developed and sold under an impenetrable cloak of originality. It is therefore rejected.

Plaintiff has presented no evidence that the means used by defendants to obtain the alleged trade secret were improper or dishonest. In short, it has no evidence Corlew actually stole the design specifications. It instead necessarily relies upon an inferencethat the only way defendants could develop, market, and sell their products in so short of time is if Corlew stole the design specification information-that is, as far as the evidence to this point shows, is [sic] unjustified. Plaintiff does not seem to argue that reverse engineering is impossible, just that it would take a great deal of time, skill, and expense, and that the lack thereof demonstrates that the design specifications must have been stolen. Defendants have argued that the plaintiff's products were simple, consisting of non-technical and few parts, that reverse engineering would take little time, and that, in any event, they only reverse engineered a small fraction, not all, of plaintiff's products. Plaintiff has not sufficiently rebutted these contentions. Thus, because plaintiff has failed to make a clear showing that defendants improperly obtained and reverse engineered its products, trade secret protection at this stage of the litigation is improper. See, e.g., Bridge C.A.T. Scan Associates v. Technicare Corp., 710 F.2d 940, 946-47 (2d Cir. 1983) (lack of evidence that means to receive information that plaintiff claimed was trade secret were improper mandated denying preliminary injunctive relief).

# COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS 

1. Why is reverse engineering lawful? If, as the UTSA Commissioners suggested, one purpose of trade secret law is to promote standards of commercial ethics, doesn't there seem to be something wrong with taking apart a competitor's product in order to figure out how to copy it? Does reverse engineering benefit only those competitors who are not smart enough to develop ideas or products for themselves?

In Chicago Lock Co. v. Fanberg, 676 F.2d 400 (9th Cir. 1982), the manufacturer of cylindrical locks sued a locksmith who compiled a list of master key codes for the plaintiff's locks by soliciting information from those who had picked the locks on behalf of their clients. The court rejected the claim, holding that the owners of the individual locks had the right to open them, and therefore to authorize others to reverse engineer the key codes:

A lock purchaser's own reverse-engineering of his own lock, and subsequent publication of the serial number-key code correlation, is an example of the independent invention and reverse engineering expressly allowed by trade secret doctrine. ^[4] Imposing an obligation of nondisclosure on lock owners here would frustrate the intent of California courts to disallow protection to trade secrets discovered through "fair and honest means." See id. Further, such an implied obligation upon the lock owners in this case would, in effect, convert the Company's trade secret into a state-conferred monopoly akin to the absolute protection that a federal patent affords. Such an extension of California trade secrets law would certainly be preempted by the federal scheme of patent regulation.

Appellants, therefore, cannot be said to have procured the individual locksmiths to breach a duty of nondisclosure they owed to the Company, for the locksmiths owed no such duty.
Isn't protection of lock codes often in the public interest? As we will see in Chapter IV(D)(1)(iv)(b), the Digital Millennium Copyright Act prohibits circumvention of digital locks (and "trafficking" in lock codes) to protect copyrighted works from unauthorized distribution.
2. Consider the recurring question of whether the parties can agree to override trade secret law. Suppose that the owner of a trade secret includes in a license or sale contract a provision prohibiting the buyer from reverse engineering the product. Is that contractual provision enforceable? The courts are split. Compare SAS Institute v. World Programming Ltd., 874 F.3d 370 (4th Cir. 2017) (enforcing contract that barred reverse engineering, albeit between sophisticated businesses), and K&G Oil Tool \& Serv. Co. v. G \& G Fishing Tool Serv., 158 Tex. 94, 314 S.W.2d 782, 785-86 (1958) (contract preventing disassembly of tools to protect trade secrets was enforceable), with Vault Corp. v. Quaid Software Ltd., 847 F.2d 255, 265-67 (5th Cir. 1988) (contract provision prohibiting reverse engineering of software void as against public policy); Aqua Connect, Inc. v. Code Rebel, Inc., 2012 WL 469737 (C.D. Cal. Feb. 13, 2012) ("the mere presence of the EULA does not convert reverse engineering into an 'improper means' within the definition of California trade secret law.").
3. Trade secret law does not protect owners against legitimate purchasers who discover the secret through reverse engineering. But does the possibility that a product might be reverse engineered foreclose any trade secret protection? Recall Data General Corp. v. Grumman Systems Support Corp., 825 F.Supp. 340 (D. Mass. 1993), where the court upheld a jury's verdict that Grumman had misappropriated trade secrets contained in object code form in Data General's computer program, despite the fact that many copies of the program had been sold on the open market. The court reasoned:

With the exception of those who lawfully licensed or unlawfully misappropriated MV/ADEX, Data General enjoyed the exclusive use of MV/ADEX. Even those who obtained MV/ADEX and were able to use MV/ADEX were unable to discover its trade secrets because MV/ADEX was distributed only in its object code form, which is essentially unintelligible to humans.
Id. at 359 (emphasis in original). The court noted that Data General took significant steps to preserve the secrecy of MV/ADEX, requiring that all users of the program sign licenses agreeing not to disclose the program to third parties. Under this decision, a defendant may have to prove that they had some sort of legitimate access to the plaintiff's information-for example, by demonstrating that they reverse engineered it from a publicly available product-even though the product containing the secret is widely distributed.

Similarly, in Reingold v. Swiftships, 126 F.3d 645 (5th Cir. 1997), the court rejected a claim that a boat hull mold could not be a trade secret because it could readily be reverse engineered. While reverse engineering may protect one who engages in it, the court held, it does not protect those who actually acquire the secret by improper means. Should ease of reverse engineering be a measure of whether information is "readily ascertainable"? Should it matter whether the reverse engineering is very difficult or easy enough that any competitor could do it? how many firms have actually reverse engineered the product? If reverse engineering is sufficiently easy, it may be that there is simply no secret to protect. In that case, not only the reverse engineer but anyone who obtains the secret would not face trade secret liability, even if they obtained it by improper means.

The Data General cases suggest that reasonable efforts to protect the secrecy of an idea contained in a commercial product-such as locks, black boxes, or the use of unreadable code-may suffice to maintain trade secret protection even after the product itself is widely circulated. Does this result make sense? For a different approach, see Videotronics v. Bend Electronics, 564 F.Supp. 1471, 1476 (D. Nev. 1983) (holding that software cannot be a trade secret if it is publicly distributed and can be readily copied).
4. If a company is looking for a piece of information-say, the solution to a given technical problem-the company should be allowed free access to information in the public domain. The reason is that minimizing the search costs of the company is a social good, consistent with some level of protection for the prior investment of others. In a similar vein, suppose the costs of obtaining that information from the public domain are very high, but the costs (to the company) of stealing it from a competitor are very low. Should society punish-and therefore deter-the theft? Wouldn't that simply create an inefficiency, since the company could get the information but would have to incur greater search costs? Cf. David Friedman, William Landes \& Richard Posner, Some Economics of Trade Secret Law, 5 J. ECON. PERSPECTIVES 61, 62 (1991) (arguing that trade secret law prohibits only costly means of obtaining competitors' information, while encouraging cheaper forms of obtaining information such as reverse engineering). Are there other considerations that militate in favor of requiring such a search?
5. Clean Rooms and Independent Creation. In Snapkeys Ltd. v. Google LLC, 539 F.Supp.3d 1040, 1052 (N.D. Cal. 2021), the court rejected a claim that Google took the plaintiff's code for a smartwatch keyboard. The court found that Google "presents undisputed evidence of independent creation. Google engineers who worked on the code for Google's keyboard application for smartwatches never saw the two smartwatches." See also Mann v. Columbia Pictures, 128 Cal.App.3d 628, 650 (1982) (independent creation was a defense because there was no evidence defendant screenwriters had seen the plaintiff's script).

# PROBLEMS 

Problem II-13. Atech and Alpha both manufacture complex medical devices used in diagnosing a variety of ailments. These devices are sold almost exclusively to hospitals since they cost in excess of $100,000 each. There are several hundred Atech devices currently in use in hospitals throughout the country. Atech, which claims a trade secret in the internal workings of its device, carefully monitors the purchasers of its device. Alpha pays a third party to buy a device from Atech without disclosing that it will be given to Alpha. Once it has obtained the device, Alpha disassembles it and studies it in order to compare it to Alpha's own device. In the course of opening it up, Alpha's engineers pick two internal padlocks on the Atech device. When Atech discovers that Alpha has obtained the device, it demands the unit's return, offering to refund the purchase price. Alpha refuses, and Atech sues for misappropriation of trade secrets.
a) Assume that Atech's trade secrets were worth $5 million. Assume further that the padlocks cost $5 each, and that it costs $100 per lock to pick these padlocks. Has Atech taken reasonable precautions to preserve its secrets? What other security measures must Atech take-and at what cost-both to deter Alpha (and others) from reverse engineering and to preserve its secrecy? Does Atech's sale of the products on the open market automatically preclude a finding of secrecy?
b) Assume Atech has presented the buyer of the machine with a contract that licenses (rather than sells) the machine, subject to the following restrictions: (i) the buyer is prohibited from disclosing anything she learns during the course of using the machine; (ii) the buyer is prohibited from reselling the machine; and (iii) the buyer is liable for Atech's damages in the event that any third party learns of Atech's secrets from the buyer or the buyer's machine. Is such an agreement enforceable? Would you advise a client thinking of licensing an Atech machine to sign this contract? How would you redraft the agreement to protect the buyer?
c) Assume that after Alpha's engineers picked the padlocks, they gained access to the inner workings of the machine. Assume further that they discovered numerous flaws in the imaging mechanism that caused potentially serious defects in the images (and hence the diagnoses) stemming from the Atech machine. Finally, assume that Alpha's engineers not only fixed these problems but significantly improved on Atech's design and hence the reliability of the machine. Should these facts affect Alpha's liability? Atech's remedy?

Problem II-14. Bonnie Bluenote, a world-famous blues guitarist, is noted for her distinctive sound, which she gets by tuning her guitar specially every time before she plays. Although the guitar itself is a standard professional model, Bonnie's adjustments of settings on the guitar, amplifier, and sound system combine to produce a distinctive sound. Because the sound is so important to her image, Bonnie guards it carefully. While she is tuning her guitar, only band members and close associates are allowed in the room. When she records in a new studio, she has the sound engineers sign nondisclosure agreements.

One day Freddie Fender-Rhodes, a big fan of Bonnie's and a budding bluesman himself, is hanging around outside the studio where Bonnie is recording her newest album. He happens to see an ID tag, worn by all guests in the studio, in the wastebasket. He fills in his name and walks into the studio. The band members and recording engineers, seeing the tag, let Freddie stay. He observes how Bonnie tunes her guitar, sees the soundboard settings, and makes extensive mental notes.

Five months later, Bonnie is shocked to see in a record store a CD by Freddie titled "The Bonnie Bluenote Sound." Then she discovers that Freddie is planning to publish an article in Blues Guitar magazine revealing the secrets to Bonnie's sound. Does she have any recourse against Freddie? What additional precautions should she have taken?


^[11] Reverse engineering is the process by which an engineer takes an already existing product and works backward to re-create its design and/or manufacturing process." United Technologies Corp. by Pratt \& Whitney v. F.A.A., 102 F.3d 688, 690 n. 1 (2d Cir. 1996).
^[4] If a group of lock owners, for their own convenience, together published a listing of their own key codes for use by locksmiths, the owners would not have breached any duty owed to the Company. Indeed, the Company concedes that a lock owner's reverse engineering of his own lock is not "improper means."