
Corporations provide certain characteristics for a collective business relationship that differ from what parties may easily achieve by contract or would apply in a traditional partnership structure. Recall that in a general partnership, the default state of affairs is that partners bear unlimited liability for partnership debt, partners have equal rights to participate in management, the partnership is not treated as a separate entity for tax purposes, there is no asset partitioning, the exit of a partner results in the dissolution of the partnership, and partnership shares are not freely transferable.

Corporations differ in each of these respects. Indeed, the key difference is that the law recognizes the corporation as legally separate from its investors and managers. In most respects, a corporation is granted the same legal rights and responsibilities as would be possessed by the owner of a sole proprietorship. Thus, the corporation itself may own property and assert legal rights. It is the corporation that acts as the incorporated firm's "principal" or "employer" in contracting with employees and other agents. It is the corporation that enters into contracts with state and local governments, labor unions, suppliers, and advertising agencies. It is the corporation that makes charitable contributions and is liable for taxes generated by the firm's business activities. In short, it is the corporation that serves as the artificial sole proprietor for the incorporated firm.

In addition to this legal separateness, corporations offer incorporators a desirable set of governance arrangements:

- Limited liability. Unlike partners in the traditional partnership, corporate stockholders are not personally liable for an incorporated firm's debts, a characteristic that not only encourages individuals to invest in corporate enterprises, but facilitates a more efficient allocation of risk between stockholders and creditors. We examine this characteristic in more detail in Chapter 10.
- Free transferability of shares. Unlike the traditional partnership, corporate ownership interests, represented by shares of stock, are freely transferable without the consent of co-owners and with no effect on the continuance of the firm; as a result, shareholder liquidity needs can be met by stock market transactions in which new investors "cash out" old ones, and the firm's resources are unaffected.

- Entity permanence. Unlike the traditional partnership, which dissolves at the expression of will or death of any partner, a corporation has indefinite, theoretically infinite, life, at least until the directors and majority shareholders decide it should dissolve under applicable governance principles; this characteristic prevents an individual investor's withdrawal from destroying the going concern value of the enterprise or interfering with the business planning of those given governance control of the corporation.
- Majority rule. Unlike the traditional partnership, which requires unanimity for any change to the partnership agreement, the corporate form utilizes majority rule with respect to significant policy decisions or changes in prior governance agreements; this allows incorporated firms to adapt efficiently to changed circumstances.
- Specialization of function and centralized control. Unlike the traditional partnership, which gives each partner identical management authority, the corporate entity facilitates a specialization of function among those providing financial capital for the entity (e.g., shareholders) and human capital (usually officers and directors); the corporate form also facilitates centralized control (through directors). Both of these related characteristics facilitate adaptability so that the enterprise can efficiently respond to changing conditions. These two characteristics are central to an understanding of the corporation and corporate law, and we begin our study of them in the next section.

