
Principal-agent theorists provided new tools for understanding the relationship between passive shareholders and managers. First, theorists identified shareholders as the owners, or in agency terms, principals, of the modern corporation; managers are viewed as the shareholders' agents. This economic use of the terms "principal" and "agent" differs from legal use of these terms. In law, principals have legal rights of control and direction, and agents have legal obligations of obedience. As economists use these terms, however, principals have no inherent right of control and agents have no inherent obligation of obedience. Instead, principals and agents contract with each other to determine how much control the principal will retain, and how much control will be ceded to the agent. From this view of the principal-agent relationship, the modern corporation represents a consensual choice by shareholders and managers to cede authority and power over the modern corporation almost entirely to managers. However, the power ceded is accompanied by the use of various contractual devices that, in the view of principal-agent theorists, operate to limit the ability of managers to shirk-to use corporate resources in ways that diverge from the best interests of shareholders. These agency-cost-limiting devices include (1) direct monitoring of managers' actions, (2) bonding agreements by managers that will result in the imposition of penalties or other costs if certain objectively verifiable events do or do not occur, and (3) incentive schemes to align managers' interests with those of shareholders. All of these devices to limit agency costs involve expenses that reduce the net value of the return from operation of the modern corporation. Moreover, some amount of shirking - the residual loss-will occur despite the implementation of agency-cost-limiting mechanisms. Thus, the gains for the shareholders/principals from operating as a modern corporation will be reduced by the sum of (1) the cost of agency-cost-limiting mechanisms and (2) the residual loss. At the margin, agency-cost-limiting mechanisms are justified only to the extent that the net return to shareholders is greater than would be the case without such expenditures.

Thus, from the principal-agent perspective that came to dominate policy-maker views in the last three decades of the twentieth century, separation of ownership and control is not the central problem posed by the modern corporation. Rather, separation of ownership and control is the optimal state of affairs - the contractual allocation of rights and responsibilities for which owners and managers have bargained. Writ large, the contractarian view sees the corporation as a consensual association of value-maximizing individuals whose contractual autonomy must be acknowledged and protected. In this ideological and theoretical rethinking of the modern corporation, the role of government as regulator, and the interests of non-shareholder constituents and society as a whole, take a back seat to the goal of shareholder wealth maximization.