
## In re McDonald's Corporation Stockholder Derivative Litigation

Delaware Court of Chancery, 2023
289 A.3d 343

## Laster, V.C.

Defendant David Fairhurst served as Executive Vice President and Global Chief People Officer of McDonald's Corporation ("McDonald's" or the "Company") from 2015 until his termination with cause in 2019. In that position, Fairhurst was the executive officer with day-to-day responsibility for ensuring that one of the largest employers in the world provided its employees with a safe and respectful workplace.

In this action, stockholders of the Company have sued Fairhurst derivatively on the Company's behalf. They allege that during Fairhurst's tenure as the head of human resources, he breached his fiduciary duties by allowing a corporate culture to develop that condoned sexual harassment and misconduct. They assert that Fairhurst's fiduciary duties included a duty of oversight, which required that he make a good faith effort to establish a system that would generate the information necessary to manage the Company's human resources function. They maintain that Fairhurst had a duty to use the resulting information to do his job and to report on his areas of responsibility to the CEO and the board. Those duties, they say, demanded that he address or report upward about any red flags regarding sexual harassment and misconduct at the Company. . . .

Fairhurst has moved to dismiss the oversight claim under Rule 12(b) (6) for failing to state a claim on which relief can be granted. Fairhurst contends that Delaware law does not impose any obligation on officers comparable to the duty of oversight articulated by Chancellor Allen in In re Caremark International Inc. Derivative Litigation, 698 A.2d 959 (Del. Ch. 1996).

This decision clarifies that corporate officers owe a duty of oversight. The same policies that motivated Chancellor Allen to recognize the duty of oversight for directors apply equally, if not to a greater degree, to officers. The Delaware Supreme Court has held that under Delaware law, corporate officers owe the same fiduciary duties as corporate directors, which logically include a duty of oversight. Academic authorities and federal decisions have concluded that officers have a duty of oversight.

The fact that corporate directors owe a duty of oversight does not foreclose officers from owing a similar duty. Just as a junior manager with supervisory duties can report to a senior manager with supervisory duties, so too can an officer with a duty of oversight report to a board of directors with a duty of oversight. And just as a senior manager with supervisory duties can hold a junior manager accountable for failing to fulfill the junior manager's supervisory duties, so too can a board with a duty of oversight hold an officer accountable for failing to fulfill the officer-level duty.

Although the duty of oversight applies equally to officers, its context-driven application will differ. Some officers, like the CEO, have a company-wide remit. Other officers have particular areas of responsibility, and the officer's duty to make a good faith effort to establish an information system only applies within that area. An officer's duty to address and report upward about red flags also generally applies within the officer's area, although a particularly egregious red flag might require an officer to say something even if it fell outside the officer's domain. As with the director's duty of oversight, establishing a breach of the officer's duty of oversight requires pleading and later proving disloyal conduct that takes the form of bad faith.

Fairhurst thus owed a duty of oversight. He had an obligation to make a good faith effort to put in place reasonable information systems so that he obtained the information necessary to do his job and report to the CEO and the board, and he could not consciously ignore red flags indicating that the corporation was going to suffer harm. . . .

# I. Factual Background 

... At this stage of the proceedings, the complaint's allegations are assumed to be true, and the plaintiffs receive the benefit of all reasonable inferences. . . .

## A. THE COMPANY

The Company is a Delaware corporation with its principal place of business in Chicago, Illinois. When this litigation began, there were more than 36,000 McDonald's-branded restaurants in over 100 countries. . . . The Company has over 200,000 employees, and franchises employ another two million, making the Company one of the world's largest employers. Over half ( 55% ) of all Company and franchise employees are women. At more senior levels, the percentage of women decreases, and just over one-fourth ( 27% ) of the Company's officers are female.

Young people in entry-level positions make up a large portion of the Company's workforce, and the Company prides itself on being "America's best first job." . . .

## B. FAIRHURST BECOMES THE COMPANY'S GLOBAL CHIEF PEOPLE OFFICER

In 2015, the Company faced its first sales decline in twelve years. To turn the Company around, the board of directors (the "Board") hired Stephen J. Easterbrook as CEO. Easterbrook was a longtime Company employee who served in various positions from 1993 . . . .

In March 2015, Easterbrook formally became CEO and started working out of the Company's headquarters in Chicago, Illinois. Easterbrook promptly promoted Fairhurst to the position of Global Chief People Officer. Fairhurst, another longtime Company employee, previously served as the Company's Vice President and Chief People Officer for Europe. He and Easterbrook became close personal friends while working together in the Company's London office. Fairhurst joined Easterbrook at the Company's Chicago headquarters.

## C. A PARTY ATMOSPHERE

Easterbrook and Fairhurst promoted and participated in a "party atmosphere" at the Chicago headquarters. The eighth floor of the Chicago office had an open bar where executives hosted weekly happy hours. Easterbrook and Fairhurst frequently attended with their management teams. "Male employees (including senior corporate executives) engaged in inappropriate behavior at these happy hour events, routinely making female employees feel uncomfortable."

As the culture changed, the human resources function that Fairhurst oversaw failed to address complaints adequately. Former Company managers reported that "HR leaders under Mr. Easterbrook ignored complaints about the conduct of co-workers and executives. Some of those people said they feared retaliation for reporting the conduct of co-workers and executives to HR."

# D. THE COMPANY FACES PUBLIC SCRUTINY OVER SEXUAL HARASSMENT 

During the year after Easterbrook and Fairhurst took over, the Company began to face increasing public scrutiny about problems with sexual harassment and misconduct. In October 2016, more than a dozen Company workers from restaurants across the nation filed complaints with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission ("EEOC") that contained disturbing allegations about sexual harassment and retaliation. Later that month, a fast-food worker advocacy group organized a walkout by Company employees in over thirty cities across the United States to draw attention to the EEOC complaints. Major news outlets covered these events.

In May 2018, the Company faced another round of EEOC complaints, this time identifying both individual instances of misconduct and broader systemic issues throughout the Company. Company employees claimed that the human resources function turned a blind eye to harassment.

In September 2018, Company workers from ten cities across the United States organized a one-day strike to protest sexual harassment and the failure of Company management to address it. The protest attracted the attention of lawmakers, and in December 2018, United States Senator Tammy Duckworth sent an inquiry to Easterbrook about "multiple sexual harassment complaints made by employees who work at McDonald's Restaurants in Detroit, Chicago, Los Angeles, and six other cities."

## E. REPORTS OF MISCONDUCT BY FAIRHURST

During the same month that Senator Duckworth sent her inquiry, the Board received reports that Fairhurst himself had committed acts of sexual harassment. During a Company party in November 2018 for the human resources staff, Fairhurst pulled a female employee onto his lap. Over thirty Company employees witnessed the incident, and several reported it to the Company's Compliance Department. The Compliance Department evaluated the reports and "concluded that David Fairhurst behaved and put himself in a position inconsistent with the Company's Standards of Business Conduct."

On December 13, 2018, the Board's Audit \& Finance Committee (the "Audit Committee") discussed Fairhurst's misconduct. Easterbrook advised the Audit Committee that an employee described a prior incident of sexual harassment by Fairhurst in December 2016 that had not been reported to the Compliance Department. Easterbrook also reported that Fairhurst had "once before been warned about excessive drinking at Company events in the past."
The Company ostensibly had a zero-tolerance policy for acts of sexual harassment. Under the Company's policy, Fairhurst's actions qualified as sexual harassment. Because Fairhurst had grabbed the employee and forced her onto his lap, his actions technically constituted an assault. But Easterbrook recommended a deviation from the zero-tolerance policy. He proposed that Fairhurst's punishment should be "forfeiting 50% of his [target incentive plan] bonus payment for 2018" as well as "signing both an agreement regarding the conduct and a release." The Audit Committee approved Easterbrook's proposal. . . .

To document his arrangement with the Company, Fairhurst executed a "Last Chance" letter. The Last Chance Letter confirmed that Fairhurst's behavior was not an isolated incident: "Concerns have been raised to the company in the past and recently about your alcohol consumption at company-sponsored and company-related events, and separately about your personal conduct during some of those events which have made some employees uncomfortable." The Last Chance Letter recited that Fairhurst had "demonstrated inappropriate and disruptive behavior while under the influence of alcohol at a company-related gathering and dinner of U.S. HR staff on November 8,2018."

The Last Chance Letter unambiguously stated that Fairhurst's actions violated the Company's Standards of Business Conduct. It also noted that Fairhurst's misconduct put "the Company at significant risk." Despite those findings and concessions, Fairhurst continued to serve as the Company's Global Chief People Officer.

# F. MANAGEMENT AND THE BOARD TAKE ACTION TO ADDRESS THE COMPANY'S PROBLEMS WITH SEXUAL HARASSMENT AND MISCONDUCT 

The events of 2018 caused Company management and the Board to engage with the issue of sexual harassment and misconduct. In a memorandum dated January 17, 2019, Jerry Krulewitch, the Company's General Counsel, reported to the Board's Public Policy \& Strategy Committee (the "Strategy Committee") about the EEOC complaints and the ten-city strike. . . . In May 2019, during a meeting of the full Board, Krulewitch reported on the EEOC complaints. He noted that "since the charges in 2018, the Company had been working diligently to enhance its programs and policies with regard to sexual harassment with a deliberate focus on the restaurants." He then described actions the Company had taken, including revising its policies, providing training, offering new tools to franchisees, and engaging outside experts.

In June 2019 . . . Fairhurst joined Krulewitch and Robert Gibbs, the Company's Chief Communications Officer, in authoring a memorandum for the Strategy Committee. . . . The June 2019 Memorandum summarized the situation facing the Company and management's response. Under the heading "What is occurring?", the memorandum described the EEOC complaints and the allegations regarding systemic harassment. Under the heading "How is McDonald's responding to the issue of allegations of sexual harassment?", the memorandum identified steps the Company was taking . . . .

The June 2019 Memorandum was part of the pre-reading materials for a special Strategy Committee meeting devoted to the subject of sexual harassment. During that meeting, Fairhurst provided an overview of the Company's people and gender strategy, including efforts to drive gender balance and improve diversity. Krulewitch reported on the litigation against the Company and "the progress the Company had made in its efforts to promote a safe and respectful workplace."

In September 2019, the Board received an update on the Company's Enterprise Risk Management ("ERM"). The presentation identified a "Respectful Workplace" as a "New Risk Theme" at the "Top Tier 2" level. Under the Company's risk management system, a "Tier 1" risk is (i) "[c]ritical to McDonald's mission and values," (ii) "[a] ppropriate for ERM Committee discussion," and (iii) "[m]ay need further discussion around risk appetite." A Tier 2 risk is one that has the "[p]otential for sustained, negative impact to brand, long term financial grown, or strategy position." The Top Tier 2 risks are "[m]ore likely to become Tier 1 risks given the circumstances." . . .

# G. EASTERBROOK LEAVES, AND THE BOARD TERMINATES FAIRHURST FOR CAUSE 

In October 2019, the Board learned that Easterbrook was engaging in a prohibited relationship with an employee. During a telephonic meeting on October 18, the Board ordered outside counsel to investigate Easterbrook's misconduct. At a meeting on October 26, the Board decided to negotiate a separation agreement with Easterbrook. During a meeting on November 1, the Board finalized the separation agreement and terminated Easterbrook without cause.

During the November 1, 2019 meeting, the Board also addressed "employment matters related to Mr. David Fairhurst." The minutes from the meeting do not describe the discussion other than reciting that the Company's general counsel updated the Board on "his recent conversations" with Fairhurst. The Board terminated Fairhurst for cause. It is reasonable to infer at the pleading stage that Fairhurst engaged in an additional act of sexual harassment that violated the Last Chance Letter. . . .

Fairhurst subsequently entered into a separation agreement with the Company, which documented that he would not be entitled to any severance or the payment of a bonus for 2019 under the Company's target incentive plan. . . .

## H. EMPLOYEES FILE MULTIPLE LAWSUITS AGAINST THE COMPANY

On November 12, 2019, less than two weeks after Easterbrook left and the Board terminated Fairhurst, Company workers filed a class action lawsuit challenging the Company's systemic problems with sexual harassment (the "Ries Action"). The plaintiffs in the Ries Action alleged that the Company had a toxic culture and that "sexual harassment is pervasive throughout McDonald's restaurants." The Ries complaint contained detailed allegations about "routine, severe abuse" at Company restaurants while Fairhurst served as Global Chief People Officer.

In April 2020, workers filed another class action, this time on behalf of workers at Company-owned restaurants in Florida, seeking damages for sexual harassment, retaliation, and related misconduct (the "Fairley Action"). The plaintiffs received support from Time's Up Legal Defense Fund, an anti-sexual harassment group.

The complaint in the Fairley Action contained allegations similar to the Ries Action about systemic failures to curb sexual harassment at Company restaurants while Fairhurst served as Global Chief People Officer. According to the Fairley Action, "three out of every four female non-managerial McDonald's employees have personally experienced sexual harassment at McDonald's, ranging from unwelcome sexual comments to unwanted touching, groping, or fondling, to rape and assault."

# I. THIS LITIGATION . . . 

Count III of the operative complaint asserts a claim against Fairhurst for breach of fiduciary duty. The complaint alleges that Fairhurst engaged in inappropriate conduct with female employees and exercised inadequate oversight in response to risks of sexual harassment and misconduct at the Company and its franchises. . . .

## II. Legal Analysis

As one of his grounds for dismissal, Fairhurst contends that Count III fails to state a claim on which relief can be granted. . . . he plaintiffs have sued Fairhurst for breach of the duty of oversight, and they also have sued Fairhurst for breaching his duty of loyalty by engaging personally in acts of sexual harassment. Both theories state claims on which relief can be granted.

## A. An Officer's Duty of Oversight

Fairhurst seeks to defeat the plaintiffs' claim for breach of the duty of oversight by arguing that Delaware law does not recognize an oversight claim against corporate officers. Although no Delaware decision has stated the proposition in so many words, diverse authorities indicate that officers owe a fiduciary duty of oversight as to matters within their areas of responsibility. Those authorities include the reasoning of the original Caremark opinion, the Delaware Supreme Court's holding that the duties of officers are the same as the duties of directors, decisions from other jurisdictions and academic commentary, and the additional duties that officers owe as agents. This decision confirms that officers owe a duty of oversight.

## 1. The Source of Oversight Duties

Chancellor Allen's landmark opinion in Carrmark is generally credited with creating the duty of oversight, but the concept originated earlier in the Delaware Supreme Court's decision in Graham v. Allis-Chalmers Manufacturing Co., 188 A.2d 125 (Del. 1963). That decision was understood to establish "the protective 'red flags' rule," under which directors could be liable for failing to take action only if they were aware of red flags indicating wrongdoing and consciously chose not to act. Martin Lipton \& Theodore N. Mirvis, Chancellor Allen and the Director, 22 Del. J. Corp. L. 927, 939 (1997). In memorable language, the Allis-Chalmers court stated that "absent cause for suspicion there is no duty upon the directors to install and operate a corporate system of espionage to ferret out wrongdoing which they have no reason to suspect exists." 188 A. 2 d at 130. . . .

In Carrmark, Chancellor Allen artfully explained why Allis-Chalmers' colorful reference to a system of corporate espionage "could not be generalized into a rule that, absent grounds for suspected law violation, directors had no duty to assure that an information gathering and reporting system exists to provide senior management and the board with material internal operating information, including as regards legal compliance." Lipton \& Mirvis, supra, at 939. To the contrary, Chancellor Allen explained that the fiduciary mandate included a duty to make a good faith effort to ensure that information and reporting systems exist in the organization that are reasonably designed to provide to senior management and to the board itself timely, accurate information sufficient to allow management and the board, each within its scope, to reach informed judgments concerning both the corporation's compliance with law and its business performance.

Caremark, 698 A.2d at 970.
Chancellor Allen also addressed when directors could be held liable for failing to implement a reporting system to facilitate board oversight. In the words of the Caremark decision, only a sustained or systematic failure of the board to exercise oversight - such as an utter failure to attempt to assure a reasonable information and reporting system exists-will establish the lack of good faith that is a necessary condition to liability. Such a test of liability-lack of good faith as evidenced by sustained or systematic failure of a director to exercise reasonable oversight - is quite high. But, a demanding test of liability in the oversight context is probably beneficial to corporate shareholders as a class, as it is in the board decision context, since it makes board service by qualified persons more likely, while continuing to act as a stimulus to good faith performance of duty by such directors.

Id. at 971 (emphasis omitted).
In Stone v. Ritter, the Delaware Supreme Court adopted the reasoning of Caremark as a standard of liability for director oversight and identified two types of Caremark claims. 911 A.2d 362, 370 (Del. 2006). The high court wrote that to survive a motion to dismiss an oversight claim for failure to plead demand futility under Rule 23.1, a plaintiff must allege particularized facts supporting a reasonable inference that either "(a) the directors utterly failed to implement any reporting or information system or controls; or (b) having implemented such a system or controls, consciously failed to monitor or oversee its operations thus disabling themselves from being informed of risks or problems requiring their attention." Id. That framing has led to oversight claims being called either a prong-one Caremark claim or a prong-two Caremark claim.

A plaintiff typically pleads a prong-one Caremark claim by alleging that the board lacked the requisite information systems and controls. Using more functional terminology, that species of claim can be called an "Information-Systems Claim" or an "Information-Systems Theory." A plaintiff typically pleads a prong-two Caremark claim by alleging that the board's information systems generated red flags indicating wrongdoing and that the directors failed to respond. From a functional perspective, the second type of claim can be called a "Red-Flags Claim" or a "Red-Flags Theory." . . . Technically, only the Information-Systems Claim derives from Caremark. The Red-Flags Claim traces its lineage to Allis-Chalmers.

The Stone decision only recognized oversight duties for directors. Neither the Delaware Supreme Court nor this court has expressly held that officers also owe oversight duties.
The case for recognizing that officers owe oversight duties starts with the reasoning of the Caremark decision itself. One of the reasons Chancellor Allen provided for recognizing the board's duty of oversight was "the seriousness with which the corporation law views the role of the corporate board." Caremark, 698 A.2d at 970. That same seriousness extends to the role of officers. Although Section 141 (a) of the Delaware General Corporation Law (the "DGCL") provides that "[t]he business and affairs of every corporation . . . shall be managed by or under the direction of a board of directors," 8 Del. C. § 141 (a), "it is the rare corporation that is actually 'managed by' the board . . ." "In the typical corporation, it is the officers who are charged with, and responsible for, running the business of the corporation." . . .

Because of this reality, "[m]onitoring and strategy are not exclusively the dominion of the board. Actually, nondirector officers may have a greater capacity to make oversight and strategic decisions on a day-to-day basis." Indeed, from that perspective, the Caremark oversight role "is more suited to corporate officers who are responsible for managing the day-to-day affairs of the corporate enterprise." . . .

A second reason that Chancellor Allen provided for recognizing the board's duty of oversight was the "fact that relevant and timely information is an essential predicate for satisfaction of the board's supervisory and monitoring role under Section 141." Caremark, 698 A.2d at 970 . The board's need for information leads ineluctably to an imperative for officers to generate and provide that information . . . .

A related point is that officers must make decisions in their own right. The Caremark decision recognizes this dimension of officer duties when framing the Infor-mation-Systems Claim: Corporate fiduciaries can face liability if they knowingly fail to adopt an internal information and reporting system that is "reasonably designed to provide to senior management and to the board itself timely, accurate information sufficient to allow management and the board, each within its scope, to reach informed judgments concerning both the corporation's compliance with law and its business performance." 698 A.2d at 970 . As this passage shows, Chancellor Allen recognized that both senior management and the board need actionable information, because both management and the board need to be able to make decisions. The fact that officers require information to do their jobs provides further support for officers having oversight obligations.

A third reason that Chancellor Allen provided for recognizing the board's duty of oversight was the importance of having compliance systems in place so the corporation could receive credit under the federal Organizational Sentencing Guidelines. Id. at 970. That consideration does not stop at the board level either. The Guidelines state that "[h]igh-level personnel of the organization shall ensure that the organization has an effective compliance and ethics program, as described in this guideline. Specific individual(s) within high-level personnel shall be assigned overall responsibility for the compliance and ethics program." The Guidelines define an organization's "highlevel personnel" as "individuals who have substantial control over the organization or who have a substantial role in the making of policy within the organization," which includes "a director; an executive officer, an individual in charge of a major business or functional unit of the organization, such as sales, administration, or finance; and an individual with a substantial ownership interest." Id. § 8A1.2 cmt. 3(B) (emphasis added).
The Guidelines thus explicitly call for executive officers to undertake compliance and oversight obligations. . . . The steps necessary to meet the expectations of the Guidelines thus extend beyond the board. The importance of officer-level involvement is so apparent that the Organizational Sentencing Guidelines are credited with helping to create a new C-level position: the Chief Compliance Officer. It would seem hard to argue that, simply by virtue of being an officer, the Chief Compliance Officer could not owe a duty of oversight. That, however, is the logical implication of Fairhurst's position that only directors can owe a duty of oversight.

The Caremark decision was primarily about the dimension of the oversight duty that supports the Information-Systems Claim. The three foundational premises for recognizing the duty supporting such a claim easily encompass officers. It follows that this dimension of the oversight duty applies to officers.

The dimension of the oversight duty that supports the Red-Flags Claim also applies to officers. . . Just as it makes sense for the Information-Systems Obligation to extend to officers, it also makes sense for the Red-Flags Obligation to extend to officers. As the day-to-day managers of the entity, the officers are optimally positioned to identify red flags and either address them or report upward to more senior officers or to the board. The officers are far more able to spot problems than part-time directors who meet a handful of times a year. The Red-Flags Obligation simply recognizes that the officers who are running the business on a full-time basis have a duty to address or report upward regarding what they see.

# 2. Officers Owe the Same Duties as Directors 

The Delaware Supreme Court's decision to equate the fiduciary obligations of officers with those of directors provides a second reason why officers owe oversight duties. In Gantler v. Stephens, the Delaware Supreme Court held that "the fiduciary duties of officers are the same as those of directors." 965 A.2d 695, 709 (Del. 2009). Everyone agrees that directors owe a fiduciary duty of oversight that includes both the Information-Systems Obligation and the Red-Flags Obligation. If officers owe the same duties as directors, then as to matters within their areas of responsibility, officers owe a duty of oversight. Declining to recognize that officers owe a fiduciary duty of oversight would mean, contra Gantler, that the fiduciary duties of officers were not the same as those of directors. . . .

## 4. Officer Accountability to the Board

The foregoing authorities all indicate that officers owe oversight duties. A contrary holding would create a gap in the ability of directors to hold officers accountable. Reasonable minds can disagree about whether, as a matter of policy, stockholders should be able to sue to hold an officer accountable for a failure to exercise oversight. But wherever one might stand on that issue, it is hard to argue that a board of directors should not be able to hold an officer accountable for a failure of oversight.

As the preceding discussion shows, an indispensable part of an officer's job is to gather information and provide timely reports to the board about the officer's area of responsibility. Pause for a moment and envision an officer telling a board that the officer did not have any obligation to gather information and provide timely reports to the board. The directors would quickly disabuse the officer of that notion, and an officer who did not get with the program would not hold that position for long.

Another critical part of an officer's job is to identify red flags, report upward, and address them if they fall within the officer's area of responsibility. Once again, pause and envision an officer telling the board that their job did not include any obligation to report on red flags or to address them. A similar learning opportunity would result. . . .

As this discussion shows, a holding that officers did not owe oversight obligations would not be limited to derivative claims by stockholders. It would apply equally to a board's ability to hold officers accountable. Denying a board of directors the ability to hold officers accountable for oversight failures would undermine the board's statutory authority under Section 141 (a).

A holding that officers did not owe oversight obligations also would undermine the efforts of other actors who can pursue the corporation's claims. To date, questions about an officer's duty of oversight have arisen in bankruptcy litigation. . . . Failing to recognize a duty of oversight for officers would prevent a bankruptcy trustee from pursuing those causes of action on behalf of the estate and its beneficiaries.

The oversight duties of officers are an essential link in the corporate oversight structure. The bulwark against stockholders liberally asserting oversight claims against officers is not the invalidity of the legal theory. Rather, it is the fact that oversight claims are derivative, so the board controls the claim unless a stockholder can plead demand futility or show wrongful refusal. It is those doctrines, applied at the pleading stage under Rule 23.1, that minimize the risk of oversight claims against officers, not the absence of any duty of oversight. . . .

# 6. The Scope of an Officer's Oversight Duty 

For the reasons previously discussed, officers owe duties of oversight comparable to those of directors. But that does not mean that the situational application of those duties will be the same. "Although the fiduciary duty of a Delaware director is unremitting, the exact course of conduct that must be charted to properly discharge that responsibility will change in the specific context of the action the director is taking with regard to either the corporation or its shareholders." Malone v. Brincat, 722 A.2d 5,10 (Del. 1998). The same is true for officers, who regularly operate in different contexts than directors.

Most notably, directors are charged with plenary authority over the business and affairs of the corporation. See 8 Del. C. §141 (a). That means that "the buck stops with the Board." In re Del Monte Foods Co. S`holders Litig., 25 A.3d 813, 835 (Del. Ch. 2011). It also means that the board has oversight duties regarding the corporation as a whole.

Although the CEO and Chief Compliance Officer likely will have company-wide oversight portfolios, other officers generally have a more constrained area of authority. With a constrained area of responsibility comes a constrained version of the duty that supports an Information-Systems Claim. For example, the Chief Financial Officer is responsible for financial oversight and for making a good faith effort to establish reasonable information systems to cover that area. The Chief Legal Officer is responsible for legal oversight and for making a good faith effort to establish reasonable information systems to cover that area. The executive officer in charge of sales and marketing is not responsible for the financial or legal reporting systems. And of course, the board can tailor the officers' obligations and responsibilities.

For similar reasons, officers generally only will be responsible for addressing or reporting red flags within their areas of responsibility, although one can imagine possible exceptions. If a red flag is sufficiently prominent, for example, then any officer might have a duty to report upward about it. An officer who receives credible information indicating that the corporation is violating the law cannot turn a blind eye and dismiss the issue as "not in my area."

Another important question is the standard of liability for officers. As with directors, officers only will be liable for violations of the duty of oversight if a plaintiff can prove that they acted in bad faith and hence disloyally. . . . The officer must consciously fail to make a good faith effort to establish information systems, or the officer must consciously ignore red flags.

# B. THE PLAINTIFFS' ALLEGATIONS AGAINST FAIRHURST SUPPORT AN OVERSIGHT CLAIM 

The plaintiffs claim that Fairhurst breached his "duty of care by exercising inadequate oversight over enterprise risk management, and with regard to sexual harassment happening at the Company's franchises." The plaintiffs thus frame their oversight claim explicitly as a breach of the duty of care. As this decision has explained, officers owe a duty of oversight, but liability requires pleading and later proving bad faith. The allegation that Fairhurst's conduct breached the duty of care is insufficient. . . .

The real question, therefore, is whether the complaint contained a short, plain statement of facts sufficient to support a claim against Fairhurst for breach of the duty of oversight. See Ct. Ch. R. 8(a); Central Mortg. Co., 27 A.3d at 535. Not fixating on the plaintiffs' use of the word "care" is particularly appropriate in this case, because before this decision, no Delaware court had held that a plaintiff must assert that an officer acted in bad faith or disloyally to support an oversight claim. . . .

The plaintiffs' oversight claim asserts that a culture of sexual misconduct and sexual harassment was allowed to develop at the Company. From a theoretical standpoint, nothing prevents a stockholder from asserting a derivative claim for breach of the duty of oversight based on that theory. See Daniel Hemel \& Dorothy S. Lund, Sexual Harassment and Corporate Law, 118 Colum. L. Rev. 1583, 1641, 1643-46 (2018). "[C]orporate fiduciaries who fail to monitor harassment at their firms may be liable in certain circumstances under a Caremark theory." Id. at 1641. And "corporate fiduciaries who are aware of harassment but fail to react-or who affirmatively enable harassment to continue-may be sued for breach of the duties of care and loyalty." Id.

In this case, the plaintiffs describe their oversight claim as resting on Fairhurst knowing about evidence of sexual misconduct and acting in bad faith by consciously disregarding his duty to address the misconduct. In other words, the plaintiffs have asserted a Red-Flags Claim. They have not asserted an Information-Systems Claim.
They also have not asserted that Fairhurst consciously caused the Company to violate laws that protect against sexual harassment, such as Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 or state-level human rights laws. See Hemel \& Lund, supra, at 1610, 1630. That type of claim - known colloquially as a "Massey Claim" - is not technically an oversight claim, but it has a similar feel. See Lebanon Cnty. Empls.' Ret. Fund v. Collis, 2022 WL 17841215, at *18 (Del. Ch. Dec. 22, 2022).

To plead a Red-Flags Claim that will survive a Rule 12(b) (6) motion, a plaintiff must plead facts supporting an inference that the fiduciary knew of evidence of corporate misconduct. The plaintiff also must plead facts supporting an inference that the fiduciary consciously failed to take action in response. The pled facts must support an inference that the failure to take action was sufficiently sustained, systematic, or striking to constitute action in bad faith. A claim that a fiduciary had notice of serious misconduct and simply brushed it off or otherwise failed to investigate states a claim for breach of duty.

# 1. The Existence of Red Flags 

The plaintiffs' Red-Flags Claim asserts that Fairhurst permitted a toxic culture to develop at the Company that turned a blind eye to sexual harassment and misconduct. As the red flags evidencing that growing culture, the plaintiffs cite a series of events, with the following pertinent to the claim against Fairhurst:

- Easterbrook and Fairhurst took over at the Company in 2015.
- Easterbrook and Fairhurst promoted a party atmosphere at the Company that emphasized drinking.
- The human resources department ignored complaints about the conduct of co-workers and executives.
- Employees feared retaliation for reporting complaints to the human resources department.
- In October 2016, over a dozen Company employees filed complaints with the EEOC about sexual harassment and misconduct at the Company.
- Later that month, employees in over thirty cities across the United States staged a one-day walkout to protest problems with sexual harassment and misconduct at the Company.
- In December 2016, Fairhurst engaged in an act of sexual harassment that was not reported to the Company's Compliance Department and did not reach the Audit Committee or the Board.
- In May 2018, over a dozen Company employees filed coordinated complaints with the EEOC.
- In September 2018, Company workers from ten cities organized a one-day strike to protest the Company's culture of sexual harassment.
- In November 2018, Fairhurst engaged in an act of sexual harassment at a party for the human resources staff. Over thirty Company employees witnessed the incident, and several reported it to the Company's Compliance Department. The Compliance Department concluded that Fairhurst violated the Company's Standards of Business Conduct.
- In December 2018, the Audit Committee reviewed the incident involving Fairhurst and chose to discipline him and require that he execute the Last Chance Letter.
- Also in December 2018, Senator Duckworth wrote a letter to the Company about sexual harassment complaints against the Company.
- In June 2019, Senator Duckworth joined with seven other United States Senators in writing to the Company and asking specific questions about sexual harassment and workplace safety.
- In October 2019, the Board learned that Easterbrook was engaging in a prohibited relationship with a Company employee.
- In November 2019, after investigating Easterbrook's misconduct, the Board terminated Easterbrook without cause.
- Also in November 2019, the Board terminated Fairhurst with cause, inferably because he had violated the terms of his Last Chance Letter and engaged in an additional act of sexual harassment.
- Also in November 2019, workers filed the Ries Action against the Company, alleging that it had a toxic culture that accommodates sexual harassment.
- In April 2020, workers filed the Fairley Action against the Company, seeking damages for sexual harassment, retaliation, and related misconduct.

These allegations support Fairhurst's knowledge of red flags. As Global Chief People Officer, he was the executive officer with day-to-day responsibility for overseeing the human resources function and promoting a safe and respectful environment. He was supposed to have his ear to the ground and be knowledgeable about the Company's employees. For someone in Fairhurst's position, the coordinated EEOC complaints in October 2016, followed by a thirty-city walkout, were massive red flags. He should have been figuring out whether something was seriously wrong and either addressing it or reporting upward to the CEO and the directors. For someone in Fairhurst's position, the second round of coordinated EEOC complaints in May 2018, followed by a second one-day strike in ten cities in September 2018, was another set of red flags. He again should have been figuring out whether something was seriously wrong and either addressing it or reporting upward to the CEO and the directors.

The Section 220 documents that the Company produced support the inference that the management team regarded these events as red flags. In January 2019, the Company's General Counsel reported to the Strategy Committee about the EEOC complaints and management's deployment of resources to address sexual harassment and misconduct at the Company. In May, the General Counsel discussed the same issues with the full Board. In June, the Strategy Committee held a special meeting devoted solely to those issues and the Company's response. In September, the Company's enterprise risk management assessment added a "Respectful Workplace" as a "New Risk Theme" at the "Top Tier 2" risk level.

At the pleading stage, it is reasonable to infer that there were problems with sexual harassment and misconduct at the Company. It is also reasonable to infer that Fairhurst knew about them. The alternative inference-that the Company's Global Chief People Officer did not know-is not reasonable. In any event, Fairhurst undoubtedly knew about them by June 2019 because, during that month, he co-authored a memorandum to the Strategy Committee about management's response. . . .

# 2. The Response to the Red Flags 

Pleading red flags is not enough. The plaintiffs also must plead facts supporting an inference that Fairhurst acted in bad faith by consciously ignoring red flags. . . .

Several factors support an inference of scienter. First, there are the allegations about Fairhurst's own participation in multiple acts of sexual harassment. He committed an act of sexual harassment in December 2016, shortly after the first set of EEOC complaints and the associated thirty-city walkout. He committed another act of sexual harassment in November 2018, after the second round of EEOC complaints and the ten-city strike. He committed a third act of sexual harassment in November 2019, after spending the prior year focusing with the rest of the management team on ways to address the Company's problems with sexual harassment and misconduct. When considering whether a defendant consciously ignored red flags regarding a culture of sexual harassment and misconduct, it is reasonable to give weight to the fact that the defendant himself committed multiple acts of sexual harassment, including repeating the behavior after being disciplined and given a last chance. It is reasonable to infer that such an individual could consciously turn a blind eye to red flags about similar conduct by others.

Second, the complaint alleges that under Fairhurst's watch, the human resources department ignored complaints about the conduct of co-workers and executives. The complaint also alleges that employees feared retaliation for reporting complaints to the human resources department. Those allegations support the inference that as a serial harasser, Fairhurst was consciously failing to do what he should have done to address problems with sexual harassment and misconduct. Instead, he and Easterbrook were promoting and enjoying the party atmosphere at headquarters.

Third, there is an absence of evidence from the Section 220 production indicating that Fairhurst took action to report upward to the director level about sexual harassment issues before June 2019. There is a similar absence of evidence from the Section 220 production indicating that the Company was taking meaningful action to address problems with sexual harassment and misconduct until January 2019. It is reasonable to infer that the events of 2018 prompted Company management to begin focusing on the issue and caused the directors to engage. The directors' realization that the Company's Global Chief People Officer had committed two known acts of sexual harassment doubtless contributed to their decision to make the issue a priority for 2019.

To be sure, there is record evidence indicating that during 2019, Fairhurst was part of the effort by Company management to address the problem of sexual harassment and misconduct. Most notably, he co-authored a memorandum for the Strategy Committee's meeting in June 2019 that described what action the Company was taking in response to the red flags about sexual harassment. He also gave presentations to the Strategy Committee in June and September. The actions that Company management took, such as adopting an updated anti-sexual harassment policy and creating new employee training programs, would have involved the human resources department that Fairhurst led.
Beginning in 2019, therefore, it is not possible to draw an inference that Fairhurst consciously ignored the Company's problems with sexual harassment and misconduct. But it is also fair to note that Fairhurst had been disciplined for sexual harassment in November 2018. He was part of the problem, and he was caught, so he had to be part of the solution. Of course, he also engaged in a third act of sexual harassment in November 2019 and was terminated for it. It is reasonable to infer that Fairhurst's acts of sexual harassment constituted knowing misconduct.

Given the pled facts, it is possible that even during 2019, Fairhurst went through the motions of assisting his colleagues while continuing to turn a blind eye to instances of harassment until his termination in November 2019. It is also possible that Fairhurst participated in good faith in the Company's response and therefore will not face liability for conduct that occurred during 2019. At the pleading stage, it is not possible to decide between these inferences or determine the metes and bounds of Fairhurst's potential liability. It is enough to hold that the complaint's allegations support a claim against Fairhurst for breach of the duty of oversight.

# C. THE PLAINTIFFS' ALLEGATIONS AGAINST FAIRHURST STATE A CLAIM FOR BREACH OF THE DUTY OF LOYALTY AS TO HIS OWN ACTS OF HARASSMENT 

The plaintiffs also claim that Fairhurst breached his fiduciary duties by engaging personally in acts of sexual harassment. That theory states a claim on which relief can be granted.
"[F]iduciaries violate the duty of loyalty when they engage in harassment themselves." Hemel \& Lund, supra, at 1641. Although "[t]he standard of loyalty is measured by no fixed scale," a director's duty of loyalty "requires an undivided and unselfish loyalty to the corporation" and "demands that there shall be no conflict between duty and self-interest." Guth v. Loft, Inc., 5 A.2d 503, 510 (Del. 1939). "Corporate officers and directors are not permitted to use their position of trust and confidence to further their private interests." Id. When a fiduciary "intentionally acts with a purpose other than that of advancing the best interests of the corporation," the fiduciary acts in bad faith, which constitutes a breach of the duty of loyalty. Disney, 906 A.2d at 67. "[A] CEO or other corporate officer who uses a position of power to harass, intimidate, or assault employees clearly acts for a purpose other than that of advancing the company's interests."

The prior section details the specific allegations contained in the complaint about multiple incidents of sexual harassment by Fairhurst. When Fairhurst engaged in sexual harassment, he was not acting subjectively to further the best interests of the Company. He therefore was acting in bad faith. The allegations against Fairhurst accordingly support a claim for breach of the duty of loyalty.

In response to the plaintiffs' assertion that sexual harassment constitutes a breach of the duty of loyalty, Fairhurst argues that the plaintiffs failed to plead facts supporting an inference that he subjectively intended to harm the Company. For a fiduciary to act with a subjective intent to harm a corporation is one form of bad faith. Disney, 906 A.2d at 64. Bad faith also encompasses "intentional dereliction of duty [or] a conscious disregard for one's responsibilities." Id. at 66. And a fiduciary acts in bad faith where he possesses a "dishonest purpose or moral obliquity."
More generally, a fiduciary acts in bad faith when the fiduciary "intentionally acts with a purpose other than that of advancing the best interests of the corporation." Stone, 911 A.2d at 369. "It makes no difference the reason why the [fiduciary] intentionally fails to pursue the best interests of the corporation." "Bad faith can be the result of any emotion that may cause a [fiduciary] to intentionally place his own interests, preferences or appetites before the welfare of the corporation." "Greed is not the only human emotion that can pull one from the path of propriety; so might hatred, lust, envy, revenge, . . . shame or pride."

It is not reasonable to infer that Fairhurst acted in good faith and remained loyal to the Company while committing acts of sexual harassment, violating company policy, violating positive law, and subjecting the Company to liability. It is reasonable to infer that Fairhurst acted disloyally and for an improper purpose, unrelated to the best interests of the Company.

Although this analysis seems straightforward, some might question as a matter of policy whether a claim for breach of fiduciary duty should extend to acts of sexual harassment. After all, a corporation can terminate the offending employees, and there often will be a claim for breach of an employment agreement. Victims can pursue remedies under federal and state law. Some might ask whether the Court of Chancery should be hearing sexual harassment claims and worry that recognizing such a claim will open the floodgates to employment-style litigation.

A flood of new employment-style claims seems unlikely. Like an oversight claim, a claim for breach of duty based on the officer's own acts of sexual harassment is derivative, so all of the protections associated with derivative claims apply. The claim is not one that a victim has standing to bring against a solvent corporation: Until a victim obtains a judgment against the corporation, the victim is a contingent creditor, and after judgment, an actual creditor.

A claim for breach of fiduciary duty is also not duplicative of other remedies. In many cases, a claim for breach of an employment agreement may be a possible cause of action, but not all fiduciaries have employment agreements. Directors rarely do. If an officer or director personally engages in acts of sexual harassment, and if the entity suffers harm, then either the governing body of the entity (or, if necessary, a plaintiff acting properly on its behalf) should be able to assert a claim for breach of fiduciary duty in an effort to shift the loss that the entity suffered to the human actor who caused it.

Sexual harassment is bad faith conduct. Bad faith conduct is disloyal conduct. Disloyal conduct is actionable. The claim against Fairhurst for his own acts of sexual harassment survives review under Rule 12(b) (6)....

# NOTES AND QUESTIONS 

1. Recall that Vice Chancellor Laster took pains to clarify that establishing a breach of an officer's oversight duty required bad-faith conduct. Recall, further, that Delaware G.C.L. §102 (b) (7) permits corporations to exculpate officers for liability for money damages for violations of the duty of care. Therefore, could a corporation exculpate an officer's Carrmark duties under McDonald's?
2. Some commentators view the McDonald's decision as a further expansion of the Caremark doctrine, even beyond the obvious extension of liability to officers. Consider how the plaintiffs did not allege pervasive criminal conduct within the organization, nor did they argue that the conduct posed an "existential threat[ ]" to the company. Stephen Bainbridge, Delaware Court's McDonald's Opinion: Another Step in Caremark's Ingestion of All Corporate Law, Washington Legal Foundation Blog (Feb. 9, 2023), https://www.wlf.org/2023/02/09/wlf-legal-pulse/delaware-courts-mcdonalds-opinion-another-step-in-caremarks-ingestion-of-all-corporatelaw/. Moreover, the decision to deem Fairhurst's own misconduct as a breach of his fiduciary duty of loyalty "transformed sexual harassment - and who knows how much more of employment and civil rights law-into cognizable corporate law claims." Id. For a discussion of the benefits and drawbacks of expanding the scope of corporate law in this way, see Daniel Hemel \& Dorothy Lund, Sexual Harassment and Corporate Law, 118 Colum. L. Rev. 1583, 1667-1679 (2018).

# PROBLEM 4-13 

Hypo Corp. is in the business of selling law school study materials. Belinda Winter is the chief compliance officer of the company. A whistleblower claimed that Belinda had knowledge that corporate agents paid bribes to government officials in foreign countries in violation of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, and that Belinda instigated a sham investigation in order to cover up the illegal corporate activity. Hypo Corp. has paid substantial fines to settle subsequent federal charges, and a Caremark-based lawsuit has been filed against Belinda and the Hypo directors. Belinda claims that she and her office conducted a short review of available evidence, including interviews with corporate agents and concluded no illegal activity had likely occurred. The lawsuit alleges that Brenda refused to look deeply into the matter and conducted a cursory investigation to deflect attention from her own responsibility for the illegal payments-discovery of which she feared would likely result in her losing her job. Hypo Corp. has a §102 (b) (7) provision that exculpates officers as well as directors. Evaluate Belinda's risk of liability.