Transaction cost economists, principally Ronald Coase, Armen Alchian, and Oliver Williamson, have identified the behavioral and economic factors that explain why particular transactions are most efficiently organized in a particular way. In discussing transaction costs, economists commonly use three terms that will be helpful to your study of corporations and other business associations. These terms, discussed below, are bounded rationality, opportunism, and team-specific investment.

Bounded rationality. While individuals intend to act rationally, there are cognitive limits, or bounds, on their ability to do so. There are simply too many variables to be considered. Thus, Sharon will intend to value accurately Alternative 3, the brewery venture, and will intend to structure her relationship with Jake in a value-maximizing way. Nonetheless, bounds on her rationality will limit the accuracy of her judgments.

Opportunism. Economists assume that individuals pursue their own self-interest in economic matters. However, there are two categories of self-interest seeking. In simple, or open, self-interest seeking, economic actors prefer their own interests to those of other economic actors, but do so while being honest and aboreboard in their dealings. Opportunism is self-interest seeking with guile: individuals who act opportunistically seek to further their own ends by taking advantage of the information deficits of those with whom they deal. An opportunistic actor seeks to extract an advantage that would be denied him if the party with whom he deals had full information. As Oliver Williamson puts it, "opportunism refers to the incomplete or distorted disclosure of information, especially to calculated efforts to mislead, distort, disguise, obfuscate, or otherwise confuse."12

Team-specific investment. If Sharon and Jake pursue the brewery venture, they may usefully be described as a team, and their collective activities in making and marketing beer may be described as team production. When a person or asset has a higher value in its current team use than its value in its next best use, the person or asset is said to have team-specific value.

Suppose, for example, that Sharon owns and operates a generic beer distributing business and that Jake owns and operates a generic beer brewery. Sharon buys generic beer for resale to grocery stores. She currently buys from Jake, but there are other brewers who would supply generic beer on similar terms. Likewise, Jake currently sells his product to Sharon, but there are other distributors who would purchase his output on similar terms. If Jake and Sharon stopped dealing with each other, thereby terminating their team, neither would experience any loss in the value of their human or money capital because they could continue to earn the same return by dealing with others. Accordingly, neither Jake's nor Sharon's investments are team-specific.

On the other hand, suppose that Sharon is in the business of distributing only the special beer that Jake produces and that there are no other suppliers who can give her an equivalent product on similar terms. Further, suppose that Jake distributes his beer only through Sharon and that there are no replacement distributors who would purchase the same volume or pay the same price as Sharon. If Jake and Sharon stopped dealing with each other, thereby terminating their team, both would experience a loss in the value of their human or money capital. Thus, Jake's and Sharon's investments would be described as having team-specific value.
