
The term "preemption" arises in two distinct contexts in intellectual property law. One context derives from economic analysis. Economists use the term to refer to the extent to which exclusive rights bar or "preempt" others, in the absence of a license, from pursuing research or entering a field governed by a patent (or, as we will see in later chapters, other forms of intellectual property). The higher upstream or broad is the patent-e.g., laws of nature, abstract ideas-the greater the preemptive effect.

The U.S. Constitution speaks to a different form of preemption. The Supremacy Clause of the U.S. Constitution provides that This Constitution, and the Laws of the United States which shall be made in Pursuance thereof; and all Treaties made, or which shall be made, under the Authority of the United States, shall be the supreme Law of the Land; and the Judges in every State shall be bound thereby, any Thing [sic] in the Constitution or Laws of any State to the Contrary notwithstanding U.S. Constitution, Art. VI, Cl. 2. Thus, the Supremacy Clause preempts or nullifies state law attempts to duplicate or interfere with federal intellectual property protection. More difficult cases involve state laws that do not directly conflict with federal authority but instead address interstitial gaps within the federal regime. Courts must grapple with whether Congress intended to leave such gaps unfilled, thereby precluding state protection, or simply allowed state law to fill these voids. This logical structure-which involves a search for the intent behind uncovered cases, sometimes in cases where technology has outpaced legislative foresight-makes preemption particularly challenging. The doctrinal distinctions are subtle and elusive.

## Bonito Boats, Inc. v. Thunder Craft Boats, Inc. Supreme Court of the United States 489 U.S. 141 (1989)

JUSTICE O'CONNOR delivered the opinion of the Court. . . .

## I.

In September 1976, petitioner Bonito Boats, Inc., a Florida corporation, developed a hull design for a fiberglass recreational boat which it marketed under the trade name Bonito Boat Model 5VBR. Designing the boat hull required substantial effort on the part of Bonito. A set of engineering drawings was prepared, from which a hardwood model was created. The hardwood model was then sprayed with fiberglass to create a mold, which then served to produce the finished fiberglass boats for sale. The 5 VBR was placed on the market sometime in September 1976. There is no indication in the record that a patent application was ever filed for protection of the utilitarian or design aspects of the hull, or for the process by which the hull was manufactured. The 5 VBR was favorably received by the boating public, and "a broad interstate market" developed for its sale.

In May 1983, after the Bonito 5VBR had been available to the public for over six years, the Florida Legislature enacted Fla. Stat. §559.94 (1987). The statute makes "it ... unlawful for any person to use the direct molding process to duplicate for the purpose of sale any manufactured vessel hull or component part of a vessel made by another without the written permission of that other person." §559.94(2). The statute also makes it unlawful for a person to "knowingly sell a vessel hull or component part of a vessel duplicated in violation of subsection (2)." §559.94(3). Damages, injunctive relief, and attorney's fees are made available to "any person who suffers injury or damage as the result of a violation" of the statute. §559.94(4). The statute was made applicable to vessel hulls or component parts duplicated through the use of direct molding after July 1, 1983. §559.94(5).

On December 21, 1984, Bonito filed this action in the Circuit Court of Orange County, Florida. The complaint alleged that respondent here, Thunder Craft Boats, Inc., a Tennessee corporation, had violated the Florida statute by using the direct molding process to duplicate the Bonito 5VBR fiberglass hull, and had knowingly sold such duplicates in violation of the Florida statute. . . .

# III. 

We believe that the Florida statute at issue in this case so substantially impedes the public use of the otherwise unprotected design and utilitarian ideas embodied in unpatented boat hulls as to run afoul of the teaching of our decisions in Sears and Compco. It is readily apparent that the Florida statute does not operate to prohibit "unfair competition" in the usual sense that the term is understood. The law of unfair competition has its roots in the common-law tort of deceit: its general concern is with protecting consumers from confusion as to source. . . .

In contrast to the operation of unfair competition law, the Florida statute is aimed directly at preventing the exploitation of the design and utilitarian conceptions embodied in the product itself. The sparse legislative history surrounding its enactment indicates that it was intended to create an inducement for the improvement of boat hull designs. See Tr. of Meeting of Transportation Committee, Florida House of Representatives, May 3, 1983 ("There is no inducement for [a] quality boat manufacturer to improve these designs and secondly, if he does, it is immediately copied. This would prevent that and allow him recourse in circuit court"). To accomplish this goal, the Florida statute endows the original boat hull manufacturer with rights against the world, similar in scope and operation to the rights accorded a federal patentce. Like the patentee, the beneficiary of the Florida statute may prevent a competitor from "making" the product in what is evidently the most efficient manner available and from "selling" the product when it is produced in that fashion. Compare 35 U.S.C. §154. The Florida scheme offers this protection for an unlimited number of years to all boat hulls and their component parts, without regard to their ornamental or technological merit. Protection is available for subject matter for which patent protection has been denied or has expired, as well as for designs which have been freely revealed to the consuming public by their creators. That the Florida statute does not remove all means of reproduction and sale does not eliminate the conflict with the federal scheme. See Kellogg, 305 U.S., at 122. In essence, the Florida law prohibits the entire public from engaging in a form of reverse engineering of a product in the public domain. This is clearly one of the rights vested in the federal patent holder, but has never been a part of state protection under the law of unfair competition or trade secrets. . . .

Moreover, as we noted in Kewanee, the competitive reality of reverse engincering may act as a spur to the inventor, creating an incentive to develop inventions that meet the rigorous requirements of patentability. 416 U.S., at 489-490. The Florida statute substantially reduces this competitive incentive, thus eroding the general rule of free competition upon which the attractiveness of the federal patent bargain depends. . . . The Florida statute is aimed directly at the promotion of intellectual creation by substantially restricting the public's ability to exploit ideas that the patent system mandates shall be free for all to use. Like the interpretation of Illinois unfair competition law in Sears and Compco, the Florida statute represents a break with the tradition of peaceful coexistence between state market regulation and federal patent policy. The Florida law substantially restricts the public's ability to exploit an unpatented design in general circulation, raising the specter of state-created monopolies in a host of useful shapes and processes for which patent protection has been denied or is otherwise unobtainable. It thus enters a field of regulation which the patent laws have reserved to Congress. The patent statute's careful balance between public right and private monopoly to promote certain creative activity is a "scheme of federal regulation . . . so pervasive as to make reasonable the inference that Congress left no room for the States to supplement it." Rice v. Santa Fe Elevator Corp., 331 U.S. 218, 230 (1947). . . .

# COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS 

1. Does this result make sense? Is it consistent with Kewanee Oil Co. v. Bicron Corp., 416 U.S. 470 (1974) (excerpted in Chapter II(H))? Bonito Boats can be reconciled with trade secrets statutes if one accepts the reverse engincering rationale described above. Whatever one thinks of the Bonito result, the last sentence remains troubling. Characterizing patent law as "pervasive federal regulation" suggests that it might preempt the field, automatically striking down all state laws that attempt to regulate intellectual property. If taken seriously, that approach would leave no room at all for state protection of inventions.
2. Note the similarity between the statutes struck down in Sears and Bonito Boats. In both cases, what was prohibited was the direct copying of a competitor's design. The Bonito Boats statute is more limited than that in Sears, since it prohibits only one particular method of copying. Nonetheless, the Court struck it down. Why should the courts be concerned about these comparatively narrow statutes when they allowed the far broader statute in Kewanee to pass muster?
3. The Bonito Boats decision has been criticized. See John S. Wiley, Jr., Bonito Boats: Uninformed but Mandatory Federal Innovation Policy, 1989 SLP. CT. REV. 283. Cf. Symposium, Product Simulation: A Right or a Wrong?, 64 Colum. L. Rev. 1178
(1964) (articles criticizing the analogous decisions in Sears and Compco). Does this criticism make sense? Or is Bonito Boats a needed barrier to the creation of state laws that would undo the balance struck by Congress?

As part of the Digital Millenium Copyright Act, Congress created a new federal intellectual property right protecting "original" boat hull designs. 17 U.S.C. §§1301 et seq., discussed in Chapter IV. Can Congress lawfully accomplish here what the states cannot? Does Bonito Boats suggest some sort of constitutional limitation on any form of protection (state or federal) in this area?
4. Some lawyers have tried to apply Bonito Boats in contexts beyond the patent-like legislation actually considered in the case. This has not met with much success, however; like other broad preemption decisions before it, Bonito Boats has been hemmed in by subsequent qualifications. In Waits v. Frito-Lay, Inc., 978 F.2d 1093 (9th Cir. 1992), a right of publicity case based on an advertising campaign imitating Tom Waits' distinctive vocal qualities, the Ninth Circuit had the following to say about Bonito Boats:

Bonito Boats involved a Florida statute giving perpetual patent-like protection to boat hull designs already on the market, a class of manufactured articles expressly excluded from federal patent protection. The Court ruled that the Florida statute was preempted by federal patent law because it directly conflicted with the comprehensive federal patent scheme. In reaching this conclusion, the Court cited its earlier decisions in Sears Roebuck \& Co. v. Stiffel Co., 376 U.S. 225 (1964), and Compco Corp. v. Day-Brite Lighting, 376 U.S. 234 (1964), for the proposition that "publicly known design and utilitarian ideas which were unprotected by patent occupied much the same position as the subject matter of an expired patent," i.e., they are expressly unprotected. Bonito Boats, 489 U.S. at 152.

The defendants seize upon this citation to Sears and Compco as a reaffirmation of the sweeping preemption principles for which these cases were once read to stand. They argue that Midler [v. Ford Motor Co., 849 F.2d 460 (9th Cir. 1988) (another sound-alike right of publicity case that is reproduced in Chapter VI(D)] was wrongly decided because it ignores these two decisions, an omission that the defendants say indicates an erroneous assumption that Sears and Compco have been "relegated to the constitutional junkyard." Thus, the defendants go on to reason, earlier cases that rejected entertainers' challenges to imitations of their performances based on federal copyright preemption, were correctly decided because they relied on Sears and Compco. See Sinatra v. Goodyear Tire \& Rubber Co., 435 F.2d 711, 716-18 (9th Cir. 1970), cert. denied, 402 U.S. 906 (1971); Booth v. Colgate-Palmolive Co., 362 F.Supp. 343, 348 (S.D.N.Y. 1973); Davis v. Trans World Airlines, 297 F.Supp. 1145, 1147 (C.D. Cal. 1969). This reasoning suffers from a number of flaws.

Bonito Boats itself cautions against reading Sears and Compco for a "broad pre-emptive principle" and cites subsequent Supreme Court decisions retreating from such a sweeping interpretation. "[T]he Patent and Copyright Clauses do not, by their own force or by negative implication, deprive the States of the power to adopt rules for the promotion of intellectual creation." Bonito Boats, 489 U.S. at 165 (citing, inter alia, Goldstein v. California, 412 U.S. 546, 55261 (1973) and Kewanee Oil Co. v. Bicron Corp., 416 U.S. 470, 478-79 (1974)). Instead, the Court reaffirmed the right of states to "place limited regulations on the use of unpatented designs in order to prevent consumer confusion as to source." Id. Bonito Boats thus cannot be read as endorsing or resurrecting the broad reading of Compco and Sears urged by the defendants, under which Waits' state tort claim arguably would be preempted.

Moreover, the Court itself recognized the authority of states to protect entertainers' "right of publicity" in Zacchini v. Scripps-Howard Broadcasting Co., 433 U.S. 562 (1977). In Zacchini, the Court endorsed a state right-ofpublicity law as in harmony with federal patent and copyright law, holding that an unconsented-to television news broadcast of a commercial entertainer's performance was not protected by the First Amendment. Id. at 573, 576-78. The cases Frito asserts were "rightly decided" all predate Zacchini and other Supreme Court precedent narrowing Sears' and Compco's sweeping preemption principles. In sum, our holding in Midler, upon which Waits' voice misappropriation claim rests, has not been eroded by subsequent authority.
Waits v. Frito-Lay, Inc., 978 F.2d 1099-1100.
The Federal Circuit has allowed state claims that tread on patent law, particularly where the claims are made against patent owners rather than in an effort to create a new form of intellectual property protection. See, e.g., Dow Chemical v. Exxon Corp., 139 F.3d 1470 (Fed. Cir. 1998) (unfair competition claims by accused infringer based on alleged inequitable conduct not preempted); Univ. of Colorado Found. v. American Cyanamid, Inc., 196 F.3d 1366 (Fed. Cir. 1999) (state claims of fraud and unjust enrichment against patentee who stole invention from plaintiff not preempted). The court has, however, required that state claims that touch on areas of federal patent interest be judged by federal, not state, standards, so that they do not upset the balance struck by patent law. See Univ. of Colorado, supra; Midwest Industries v. Karavan Trailers, 175 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 1999). Is this a reasonable compromise?
5. In a number of cases, restrictions on the content of licensing contracts are said to raise preemption issues. One might question whether contracts are equivalent to state statutes for preemption purposes. On at least one occasion, the Supreme Court has suggested that protection of unpatentable goods (which would be prohibited under state misappropriation statutes) is permissible under contract law. See, e.g., Aronson v. Quick Point Pencil, 440 U.S. 257 (1979). On the other hand, there are a variety of circumstances in which federal patent policy precludes the parties from contracting to the contrary. See, e.g., Brulotte v. Thys Co., 379 U.S. 29 (1964) (holding unenforceable patent licensed in agreement that extends beyond patent term); Kimble v. Marrel Entertainment, LLC, 576 U.S. 446 (2015) (upholding Brulotte); Lear, Inc. v. Adkins, 395 U.S. 653 (1969) (contracts estopping licensee from challenging the validity of a patent are void); Everex Systems Inc. v. Cadtrak Corp., 89 F.3d 673 (9th Cir. 1996)
(federal policy precluding assignment of nonexclusive patent licenses prevailed over state doctrine permitting such assignments). Note that in some of these cases, such as Everex, federal preemption actually works to the benefit of the intellectual property owner.

Regardless of the particular limitations federal law imposes on licensing agreements, patent licensing in general is a question of state (not federal) law. See Gjerlov v. Schuyler Labs. Inc., 131 F.3d 1016 (Fed. Cir. 1997).
6. State laws providing a remedy when patentees send threatening "demand letters" without adequate research raise preemption concerns. These laws aim to address fair trade or consumer protection concerns, but have the potential to affect the enforcement powers of federal patentees. See Robin Feldman, Federalism, First Amendment \& Patents: The Fraud Fallacy, 17 Colum. Sci. \& Tech. L. Rev. 30, 32 (2015); Paul R. Gugliuzza, Patent Trolls and Preemption, 101 VA. L. REV. 1579, 1580 (2015).