
The business judgment rule embodies a policy decision that companies should be managed by directors, without second-guessing from shareholders. But for whom do the directors manage the corporation? In economic terms, a corporation is made up of a number of constituencies-officers, directors, shareholders, employees, customers, suppliers, and the community in which it operates. Each of these constituents has an obvious stake in the success or failure of the firm, and the actions of each of these constituents play a direct role in determining the firm's success or failure. The directors are the most powerful stakeholder, empowered by state corporation codes to manage the corporation. This power carries with it the ability to determine how profits are allocated and how the competing claims of other stakeholders are resolved. If the corporation's earnings increase substantially in a given year, should that surplus go to increase dividends, improve the warranty offered on products, increase salaries of executives or other employees, fund increased research, fund local or global charities, or increase the directors' compensation? Directors are the ultimate authority in answering these questions.

Before discussing the law that governs director decision-making, consider the two leading theories of corporate purpose discussed below. The first, "shareholder primacy," argues that corporations are to be managed for the benefit of shareholders, and that directors should focus single-mindedly on increasing their wealth. The second, "stakeholder primacy," contends that directors should have discretion to consider the interests of all of the corporation's constituencies, or stakeholders, on equal footing.

## a. Shareholder Primacy

## Milton Friedman, The Social Responsibility of Business Is to Increase Its Profits <br> New York Times, September 13, 1970

When I hear businessmen speak eloquently about the "social responsibilities of business in a free-enterprise system," I am reminded of the wonderful line about the Frenchman who discovered at, the age of 70 that he had been speaking prose all his life. The businessmen believe that they are defending free enterprise when they declaim that business is not concerned "merely" with profit but also with promoting desirable "social" ends; that business has a "social conscience" and takes seriously its responsibilities for providing employment, eliminating discrimination, avoiding pollution and whatever else may be the catchwords of the contemporary crop of reformers. In fact they are - or would be if they or anyone else took them seriously - preaching pure and unadulterated socialism. Businessmen who talk this way are unwitting puppets of the intellectual forces that have been undermining the basis of a free society these past decades.

The discussions of the "social responsibilities of business" are notable for their analytical looseness and lack of rigor. What does it mean to say that "business" has responsibilities? Only people can have responsibilities. A corporation is an artificial person and in this sense may have artificial responsibilities, but "business" as a whole cannot be said to have responsibilities, even in this vague sense. The first step toward clarity in examining the doctrine of the social responsibility of business is to ask precisely what it implies for whom.

Presumably, the individuals who are to be responsible are businessmen, which means individual proprietors or corporate executives. Most of the discussion of social responsibility is directed at corporations, so in what follows I shall mostly neglect the individual proprietor and speak of corporate executives.

In a free-enterprise, private-property system, a corporate executive is an employee of the owners of the business. He has direct responsibility to his employers. That responsibility is to conduct the business in accordance with their desires, which generally will be to make as much money as possible while conforming to the basic rules of the society, both those embodied in law and those embodied in ethical custom. Of course, in some cases his employers may have a different objective. A group of persons might establish a corporation for an eleemosynary purpose - for example, a hospital or school. The manager of such a corporation will not have money profit as his objective but the rendering of certain services.

In either case, the key point is that, in his capacity as a corporate executive, the manager is the agent of the individuals who own the corporation or establish the eleemosynary institution, and his primary responsibility is to them.

Needless to say, this does not mean that it is easy to judge how well he is performing his task. But at least the criterion of performance is straightforward, and the persons among whom a voluntary contractual arrangement exists are clearly defined.

Of course, the corporate executive is also a person in his own right. As a person, he may have many other responsibilities that he recognizes or assumes voluntarily-to his family, his conscience, his feelings of charity, his church, his clubs, his city, his country. He may feel impelled by these responsibilities to devote part of his income to causes he regards as worthy, to refuse to work for particular corporations, even to leave his job, for example, to join his country's armed forces. If we wish, we may refer to some of these responsibilities as "social responsibilities." But in these respects he is acting as a principal, not an agent; he is spending his own money or time or energy, not the money of his employers or the time or energy he has contracted to devote to their purposes. If these are "social responsibilities," they are the social responsibilities of individuals, not of business.

What does it mean to say that the corporate executive has a "social responsibility" in his capacity as businessman? If this statement is not pure rhetoric, it must mean that he is to act in some way that is not in the interest of his employers. For example, that he is to refrain from increasing the price of the product in order to contribute to the social objective of preventing inflation, even though a price increase would be in the best interests of the corporation. Or that he is to make expenditures on reducing pollution beyond the amount that is in the best interests of the corporation or that is required by law in order to contribute to the social objective of improving the environment. Or that, at the expense of corporate profits, he is to hire "hard core" unemployed instead of better qualified available workmen to contribute to the social objective of reducing poverty.

In each of these cases, the corporate executive would be spending someone else's money for a general social interest. Insofar as his actions in accord with his "social responsibility" reduce returns to stockholders, he is spending their money. Insofar as his actions raise the price to customers, he is spending the customers' money. Insofar as his actions lower the wages of some employees, he is spending their money.

The stockholders or the customers or the employees could separately spend their own money on the particular action if they wished to do so. The executive is exercising a distinct "social responsibility," rather than serving as an agent of the stockholders or the customers or the employees, only if he spends the money in a different way than they would have spent it.

But if he does this, he is in effect imposing taxes, on the one hand, and deciding how the tax proceeds shall be spent, on the other.

This process raises political questions on two levels: principle and consequences. On the level of political principle, the imposition of taxes and the expenditure of tax proceeds are governmental functions. We have established elaborate constitutional, parliamentary and judicial provisions to control these functions, to assure that taxes are imposed so far as possible in accordance with the preferences and desires of the public-after all, "taxation without representation" was one of the battle cries of the American Revolution. We have a system of checks and balances to separate the legislative function of imposing taxes and enacting expenditures from the executive function of collecting taxes and administering expenditure programs and from the judicial function of mediating disputes and interpreting the law.

Here the businessman - self-selected or appointed directly or indirectly by stockholders-is to be simultaneously legislator, executive and jurist. He is to decide whom to tax by how much and for what purpose, and he is to spend the proceeds-all this guided only by general exhortations from on high to restrain inflation, improve the environment, fight poverty and so on and on.

The whole justification for permitting the corporate executive to be selected by the stockholders is that the executive is an agent serving the interests of his principal. This justification disappears when the corporate executive imposes taxes and spends the proceeds for "social" purposes. He becomes in effect a public employee, a civil servant, even though he remains in name an employee of private enterprise. On grounds of political principle, it is intolerable that such civil servants - insofar as their actions in the name of social responsibility are real and not just windowdressing - should be selected as they are now. If they are to be civil servants, then they must be selected through a political process. If they are to impose taxes and make expenditures to foster "social" objectives, then political machinery must be set up to guide the assessment of taxes and to determine through a political process the objectives to be served.
This is the basic reason why the doctrine of "social responsibility" involves the acceptance of the socialist view that political mechanisms, not market mechanisms, are the appropriate way to determine the allocation of scarce resources to alternative uses.

On the grounds of consequences, can the corporate executive in fact discharge his alleged "social responsibilities"? On the one hand, suppose he could get away with spending the stockholders' or customers' or employees' money. How is he to know how to spend it? He is told that he must contribute to fighting inflation. How is he to know what action of his will contribute to that end? He is presumably an expert in running his company-in producing a product or selling it or financing it. But nothing about his selection makes him an expert on inflation. Will his holding down the price of his product reduce inflationary pressure? Or, by leaving more spending power in the hands of his customers, simply divert it elsewhere? Or, by forcing him to produce less because of the lower price, will it simply contribute to shortages? Even if he could answer these questions, how much cost is he justified in imposing on his stockholders, customers and employees for this social purpose? What is his appropriate share and what is the appropriate share of others?

And, whether he wants to or not, can he get away with spending his stockholders, customers' or employees' money? Will not the stockholders fire him? (Either the present ones or those who take over when his actions in the name of social responsibility have reduced the corporation's profits and the price of its stock.) His customers and his employees can desert him for other producers and employers less scrupulous in exercising their social responsibilities. . . .

Many a reader who has followed the argument this far may be tempted to remonstrate that it is all well and good to speak of government's having the responsibility to impose taxes and determine expenditures for such "social" purposes as controlling pollution or training the hard-core unemployed, but that the problems are too urgent to wait on the slow course of political processes, that the exercise of social responsibility by businessmen is a quicker and surer way to solve pressing current problems.

Aside from the question of fact-I share Adam Smith's skepticism about the benefits that can be expected from "those who affected to trade for the public good"-this argument must be rejected on grounds of principle. What it amounts to is an assertion that those who favor the taxes and expenditures in question have failed to persuade a majority of their fellow citizens to be of like mind and that they are seeking to attain by undemocratic procedures what they cannot attain by democratic procedures. In a free society, it is hard for "good" people to do "good," but that is a small price to pay for making it hard for "evil" people to do "evil," especially since one man's good is another's evil.

I have, for simplicity, concentrated on the special case of the corporate executive, except only for the brief digression on trade unions. But precisely the same argument applies to the newer phenomenon of calling upon stockholders to require corporations to exercise social responsibility (the recent G.M. crusade, for example). In most of these cases, what is in effect involved is some stockholders trying to get other stockholders (or customers or employees) to contribute against their will to "social" causes favored by the activists. Insofar as they succeed, they are again imposing taxes and spending the proceeds....
[T]he doctrine of "social responsibility" taken seriously would extend the scope of the political mechanism to every human activity. It does not differ in philosophy from the most explicitly collectivist doctrine. It differs only by professing to believe that collectivist ends can be attained without collectivist means. That is why, in my book "Capitalism and Freedom," I have called it a "fundamentally subversive doctrine" in a free society, and have said that in such a society, "there is one and only one social responsibility of business - to use its resources and engage in activities designed to increase its profits so long as it stays within the rules of the game, which is to say, engages in open and free competition without deception or fraud."

# NOTES AND QUESTIONS 

1. Milton Friedman's essay corresponded with a deepening influence of economics on the study of corporate law. In particular, in the 1970s and 1980s, economists began describing the relationship between shareholders and managers through the lens of agency theory, with managers being viewed as agents of the shareholders. Corporate governance therefore became a means of addressing agency costs, or problems that arise when management is given control over shareholder assets. See Dorothy Lund \& Elizabeth Pollman, The Corporate Governance Machine, 122 Colum. L. Rev. (2021). This application of agency theory supported the view that corporations should be managed for the benefit of shareholders but also led to arguments in favor of increasing shareholder power in service of minimizing managerial agency costs. See Robert B. Thompson, Anti-Primacy: Sharing Power in American Corporations, 71 Bus. Law. 381, 387-388 (2016).
2. At shareholder primacy's core is the welfarist argument that maximizing shareholder wealth will also benefit other corporate constituents. Shareholders are the firm's residual claimants who are entitled to what is left after all other claims have been satisfied. Asking corporate management to maximize the residual claim means that the fixed claimants - creditors and employees in particular-will be paid first. Not only that, firms that maximize profits may be better positioned to benefit other constituencies: "A successful firm provides jobs for workers and goods and services for consumers. . . . Other objectives, too, come with profit. Wealthy firms provide better working conditions and clean up their outfalls; high profits produce social wealth that strengthens the demand for cleanliness." Frank Easterbrook \& Daniel Fischel, The Economic Structure of Corporate Law 37 (Harv. Univ. Press 1996).
3. Corporations have provided billions of dollars in aid to social causes and have also taken stands on social issues such as racial inequality and climate change. As just one example, in the wake of Georgia's enactment of a sweeping election bill in 2021, more than 100 CEOs, including the CEOs of Apple, Amazon, and BlackRock, ran an ad in the New York Times opposing "any discriminatory legislation" that would make it more difficult for Americans to vote. How would Milton Friedman view these activities?

## b. Stakeholder Primacy

Milton Friedman's essay-arguably the most famous opinion piece written in the twentieth century-was enormously influential. It is often credited with propelling the shareholder primacy movement to the mainstream - so much so that two corporate law professors announced in 2001 that " [t] here is no longer any serious competitor to the view that corporate law should principally strive to increase longterm shareholder value." Henry Hansmann \& Reinier Kraakman, The End of History for Corporate Law, 89 Geo. L.J. 439 (2001). But there are signs that this point of view may be declining, and that a broader articulation of purpose that would allow directors' discretion to consider the interests of other corporate stakeholders on equal footing as shareholders may be gaining traction. Consider the following.

# Leo E. Strine Jr. \& Joey Zwillinger, What Milton Friedman Missed About Social Inequality 

New York Times Deal Book, September 10, 2020
Fifty years ago, the economist Milton Friedman warned in his seminal essay, "The Social Responsibility of Business Is to Increase Its Profits," that corporate executives would undermine the "basis of a free society" if they acted as if "business has a 'social conscience' and takes seriously its responsibilities for providing employment, eliminating discrimination, avoiding pollution and whatever else may be the watchwords of the contemporary crop of reformers."

Instead of operating in a manner that treated all stakeholders fairly, Mr. Friedman argued, every corporation should seek solely to "increase its profits within the rules of the game." Not only that, Mr. Friedman sought to weaken the rules of the game by opposing basic civil rights legislation, unions, the minimum wage and other measures that protected workers, Black people, and the environment. Mr. Friedman's cramped vision enhanced the power of the stock market and silenced the voice of workers, leading to profound inequality.

After the publication of his essay in The New York Times Magazine, Mr. Friedman's adherents gained influence in government and the business community. At the same time as Mr. Friedman's adherents disparaged government's role, they sought enormous tax subsidies, greatly reducing the share of taxes that corporations paid. The promise of vital legislative protections against the excesses of unconstrained capitalism - including the National Labor Relations Act, minimum wage laws, the Clean Air Act, the Clean Water Act, antitrust regulations and consumer safety laws, to name a few-were undercut by two generations of ceaseless attack.

The concerns Mr. Friedman lampooned as obsessions of the "contemporary crop of reformers" in 1970 remain urgent problems.

As would be expected when business leaders were told not to worry about "providing employment," wages stagnated and inequality grew. In the past 50 years, instead of gains for stockholders and top management tracking gains for workers-as characterized by the period when Mr. Friedman wrote - the returns of our capitalist system have become skewed toward the haves.

From 1948 to 1979, worker productivity grew by 108.1 percent and wages grew by 93.2 percent, with the stock market growing by 603 percent. By contrast, from 1979 to 2018 , worker productivity rose by 69.6 percent, but the wealth created by these productivity gains went predominately to executives and stockholders. Worker pay rose by only 11.6 percent during this period, while compensation for chief executives grew by an enormous 940 percent and the stock market grew by 2,200 percent.

As would be expected when corporate leaders were told not to worry about "eliminating discrimination," corporate political spending was used to help seat elected officials who opposed measures designed to reduce racial disparities in education, pay and wealth, and to support gerrymandering and voter suppression efforts.

As would be expected when corporations were told not to worry about "avoiding pollution," they used their muscle to undermine environmental protection and to conceal the dangers of climate change. As a result of environmental policy distorted by corporate money and misinformation, the entire future of humanity is now at risk.

To reverse the Friedman paradigm, companies should embrace an affirmative duty to stakeholders and society. This requires tangible, publicly articulated goals, such as paying living wages to their workers, respecting workers' right to join a union, promoting racial and gender inclusion and pay equity, enhancing safety protocols, and reducing carbon emissions. By committing to goals of responsible citizenship, companies allow stakeholders, institutional investors and the public to hold them accountable to their inclusive ideals. In doing so, corporate leaders will also set an example that institutional investors should be required to follow in their own investing and voting policies. . . .

# NOTES AND QUESTIONS 

1. The view that corporations should have a duty to all of their stakeholders and society has been gaining ground. For example, the Business Roundtable, an association of CEOs of large public companies, had a long-standing statement of corporate purpose - "corporations exist principally to serve their shareholders." In 2019, the organization issued a press release announcing a new statement of corporate purpose, reflecting CEOs' commitment to running companies "for the benefit of all stakeholders - customers, employees, suppliers, communities and shareholders." Why might CEOs of large public companies embrace a stakeholder governance model? What would Milton Friedman say?
2. Likewise, large institutional shareholders are increasingly demanding that their portfolio companies improve their performance along environmental and social dimensions. For example, Larry Fink, the CEO of BlackRock, explained in a 2018 public letter that " [t] o prosper over time, every company must not only deliver financial performance, but also show how it makes a positive contribution to society. Companies must benefit all of their stakeholders, including shareholders, employees, customers, and the communities in which they operate." This statement was celebrated as an embrace by one of the world's largest investors of an abandonment of shareholder primacy.
3. The fact that large investors have embraced a model of governance that allows corporate management to put other stakeholders' interests ahead of theirs is somewhat surprising. What could explain it? An interesting perspective notes that broadly diversified investors should have an incentive to urge companies to avoid economy-wide harm that would ultimately damage shareholder interests. See John Armour \& Jeffrey N. Gordon, Systemic Harms and Shareholder Value, 6 J. Legal Analysis 35, 39 (2014) ("[S]hare price maximization can in the presence of systemic externalities lead to reduced portfolio returns to investors."). For example, diversified shareholders should "rationally be motivated to internalize intra-portfolio negative externalities," such as by urging fossil fuel companies to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Madison Condon, Externalities and the Common Owner, 95 Wash. L. Rev. 1 (2020). We will return to this observation (and whether it reflects the law in Delaware) in the next section.
4. The classic view is that competition makes it difficult for companies to serve a social purpose: "In a competitive market with thin profit margins, a firm feeling pressure to, say, pay its employees noticeably more than their productivity warrants cannot prosper. It will be unable to raise capital well, its extra costs will chew away at profits, its sales will suffer, and it will shrink. At the limit it will disappear. Milton Friedman's famous assertion that the purpose of the corporation is, and in his view should be, to make profit for its shareholders fits tightly with a competitive market structure, such as that which the United States was widely thought to have had a half-century ago in the 1970s when Friedman rendered his famous and controversial analysis." Mark Roe, Corporate Purpose and Corporate Competition, 99 Wash. U. L. Rev. (2021). Professor Mark Roe has observed that increased market concentration resulting in massive firms with sizeable market power and supra-competitive profits may make it easier for firms to benefit their stakeholders. Id.
5. To the extent that the two conflict, do you believe that the goal of the corporation should be to produce goods and services for the benefit of society or to maximize shareholder value?

# PROBLEM 4-1 

You are a director on the board of Unitex Corporation. Unitex is incorporated in Delaware and a signatory to the Business Roundtable Statement. The CEO of Unitex proposes to outsource the work of a local plant whose workers are predominately 55 or older. Outsourcing the work to young people in Country X, a very poor country, would save substantial amounts of money and provide a means of employment to many people who would otherwise be unemployed. The new plant would be outfitted with solar panels and would reduce the company's carbon footprint. How would you approach this decision as a board member?
