
Where a patent applicant breaches the duty to prosecute a patent application in good faith and candor, it may result in a finding of inequitable conduct. See 37 C.F.R. §1.56 (2013); Purdue Pharma L.P. v. Endo Pharm. Inc., 410 F.3d 690, 695 (Fed. Cir. 2005). Inequitable conduct may "arise from an affirmative misrepresentation of a material fact, failure to disclose material information, or submission of false material information, coupled with an intent to deceive or mislead the USPTO." Id. A determination that inequitable conduct occurred in relation to one or more claims will render the entire patent unenforceable. Kingsdown Med. Consultants, Ltd. v. Hollister, Inc., 863 F.2d 867, 877 (Fed. Cir. 1988) (en banc in relevant part).

This doctrine came under scrutiny as defendants routinely alleged inequitable conduct in the hopes that they could uncover some shred of evidence casting doubt on the patentee's candor during prosecution. Such allegations provided a basis for costly and time-consuming discovery. Well-funded defendants could use the cost and delay as leverage in settling patent litigation. The threat of inequitable conduct also contributed to patentees flooding the PTO with prior art references out of concern that any article in their files could be used as part of a future inequitable conduct defense.

Therasense, Inc. v. Becton-Dickinson, Inc. United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit 649 F.3d 1276 (Fed. Cir. 2011) (en banc)

## RADER, CHIEF JUDGE.

[Therasense, a subsidiary of Abbott Laboratories, obtained several patents on disposable glucose test strips for diabetes management. Becton-Dickinson sued for a declaratory judgment that Abbott's patents were invalid. Abbott countersued Becton and Bayer Healthcare LLC for infringement. After the cases were consolidated for trial in the Northern District of California, the district court held all of the litigated patent claims either invalid or not infringed. The court also held one of the patents, U.S. Patent No. 5,820,551 ("the ' 551 patent"), unenforceable due to inequitable conduct. On appeal, a panel of the Federal Circuit unanimously affirmed all of the district court's holdings of noninfringement and invalidity, including the district court's ruling that all litigated claims in the ' 551 patent were invalid for obviousness. The panel also affirmed the district court's holding that the '551 patent was unenforceable due to inequitable conduct, but the panel was divided on that issue. The full court granted rehearing en banc solcly on the inequitable conduct issue.]

The '551 patent claims a test strip with an electrochemical sensor . . . "configured to be exposed to said whole blood sample without an intervening membrane or other whole blood filtering member . . ." '551 patent [claim 1] (emphasis added). "Whole blood," an important term in the claim, means blood that contains all of its components, including red blood cells.

In the prior art, some sensors employed diffusion-limiting membranes to control the flow of glucose to the electrode because the slower mediators of the time could not deal with a rapid in-flux of glucose. Other prior art sensors used protective membranes to prevent "fouling." Fouling occurs when red blood cells stick to the active electrode and interfere with electron transfer to the electrode. Protective membranes permit glucose molecules to pass, but not red blood cells.

Abbott filed the original application leading to the '551 patent in 1984. Over thirteen years, that original application saw multiple rejections for anticipation and obviousness, including repeated rejections over U.S. Patent No. 4,545,382 ("the '382 patent"), another patent owned by Abbott. The '382 patent specification discussed protective membranes in the following terms: "Optionally, but preferably when being used on live blood, a protective membrane surrounds both the enzyme and the mediator layers, permeable to water and glucose molecules." Col. 4 ll.63-66. "Live blood" refers to blood within a body.

In 1997, Lawrence Pope, Abbott's patent attorney, and Dr. Gordon Sanghera, Abbott's Director of Research and Development, studied the novel features of their application and decided to present a new reason for a patent. Pope presented new claims to the examiner based on a new sensor that did not require a protective membrane for whole blood. Pope asserted that this distinction would overcome the prior art ' 382 patent, whose electrodes allegedly required a protective membrane. The examiner requested an affidavit to show that the prior art required a membrane for whole blood at the time of the invention.

To meet this evidentiary request, Dr. Sanghera submitted a declaration to the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office ("PTO") stating:
[O]ne skilled in the art would have felt that an active electrode comprising an enzyme and a mediator would require a protective membrane if it were to be used with a whole blood sample. . . .
J.A. 7637. Pope, in submitting Sanghera's affidavit, represented:

The art continued to believe [following the '382 patent] that a barrier layer for [a] whole blood sample was necessary. . . .
[O]ne skilled in the art would not read lines 63 to 65 of column 4 of U.S. Patent No. 4,545,382 to teach that the use of a protective membrane with a whole blood sample is optionally or merely preferred. One skilled in the art would not have read the disclosure of the ['382 patent] as teaching that the use of a protective membrane with whole blood samples was optional. He would not, especially in view of the working examples, have read the "optionally, but preferably" language at line 63 of column [4] as a technical teaching but rather mere patent phrascology. . . .

There is no teaching or suggestion of unprotected active electrodes for use with whole blood specimens in [the '382 patent]. . . .
J.A. 7645-46.

Several years carlicr, while prosecuting the European counterpart to the '382 patent, European Patent EP 0078636 ("EP '636"), Abbott made representations to the European Patent Office ("EPO") regarding the same "optionally, but preferably" language in the European specification. On January 12, 1994, to distinguish a German reference labeled D1, which required a diffusion-limiting membrane, Abbott's European patent counsel argued that their invention did not require a diffusion-limiting membrane:

Contrary to the semipermeable membrane of D1, the protective membrane optionally utilized with the glucose sensor of the patent is [sic] suit is not controlling the permeability of the substrate ... Rather, in accordance with column 5 , lines 30 to 33 of the patent in suit:
"Optionally, but preferably when being used on live blood, a protective membrane surrounds both the enzyme and the mediator layers, permeable to water and glucose molecules."
See also claim 10 of the patent in suit as granted according to which the sensor electrode has an outermost protective membrane (11) permeable to water and glucose molecules. . . . Accordingly, the purpose of the protective membrane of the patent in suit, preferably to be used with in vivo measurements, is a safetr measurement to prevent any course [sic] particles coming off during use but not a permeability control for the substrate.
J.A. 6530-31 (emphases added).

On May 23, 1995, Abbott's European patent counsel submitted another explanation about the D1 reference and EP '636.
"Optionally, but preferably when being used on live blood, a protective membrane surrounds both the enzyme and the mediator layers, permeable to water and glucose molecules."
It is submitted that this disclosure is unequivocally clear. The protective membrane is optional, however, it is preferred when used on live blood in order to prevent the larger constituents of the blood, in particular erythrocytes from interfering with the electrode sensor. Furthermore it is said, that saidprotective membrane should not prevent the glucose molecules from penetration, the membrane is "permeable" to glucose molecules. This teaches the skilled artisan that, whereas the [D1 membrane] must ... control the permeability of the glucose . . . the purpose of the protective membrane in the patent in suit is not to control the permeation of the glucose molecules. For this very reason the sensor electrode as claimed does not have (and must not have) a semipermeable membrane in the sense of DI.
J.A. 6585 (first and third emphases added).

# III 

Inequitable conduct is an equitable defense to patent infringement that, if proved, bars enforcement of a patent. This judge-made doctrine evolved from a trio of Supreme Court cases that applied the doctrine of unclean hands to dismiss patent cases involving egregious misconduct: Keystone Driller Co. v. General Excavator Co., 290 U.S. 240, 54 (1933). . . .

Keystone involved the manufacture and suppression of evidence. The patentee knew of "a possible prior use" by a third party prior to filing a patent application but did not inform the PTO. After the issuance of the patent, the patentee paid the prior user to sign a false affidavit stating that his use was an abandoned experiment and bought his agreement to keep secret the details of the prior use and to suppress evidence. With these preparations in place, the patentee then asserted this patent, along with two other patents, against Byers Machine Co. ("Byers"). Keystone Driller Co. v. Byers Mach. Co., 4 F.Supp. 159 (N.D. Ohio 1929). Unaware of the prior use and of the cover-up, the court held the patents valid and infringed and granted an injunction.

The patentee then asserted the same patents against General Excavator Co. and Osgood Co. and sought a temporary injunction based on the decree in the previous Byers case. Keystone, 290 U.S. at 242. The district court denied the injunctions but made the defendants post bonds. The defendants discovered and introduced evidence of the corrupt transaction between the patentee and the prior user. The district court declined to dismiss these cases for unclean hands. On appeal, the Sixth Circuit reversed and remanded with instructions to dismiss the complaints. The Supreme Court affirmed.

The Supreme Court explained that if the corrupt transaction between the patentee and the prior user had been discovered in the previous Byers case, "the court undoubtedly would have been warranted in holding it sufficient to require dismissal of the cause of action." Id. at 246. Because the patentee used the Byers decree to seek an injunction in the cases against General Excavator Co. and Osgood Co., it did not come to the court with clean hands, and dismissal of these cases was appropriate.
[The Federal Circuit then summarized similar facts from subsequent Supreme Court cases, Hazel-Atlas Glass Co. v. Hartford-Empire Co., 322 U.S. 238 (1944), overruled on other grounds by Standard Oil Co. v. United States, 429 U.S. 17 (1976), and Precision Instrument Manufacturing Co. v. Automotive Maintenance Machinery Co., 324 U.S. 806 (1945).]

## IV

The unclean hands cases of Keystone, Hazel-Atlas, and Precision formed the basis for a new doctrine of inequitable conduct that developed and evolved over time. As the inequitable conduct doctrine evolved from these unclean hands cases, it came to embrace a broader scope of misconduct, including not only egregious affirmative acts of misconduct intended to deceive both the PTO and the courts but also the mere nondisclosure of information to the PTO. Inequitable conduct also diverged from the doctrine of unclean hands by adopting a different and more potent remedy—unenforceability of the entire patent rather than mere dismissal of the instant suit.

In line with this wider scope and stronger remedy, inequitable conduct came to require a finding of both intent to deceive and materiality. *Star Scientific Inc. v. R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co.*, 537 F.3d 1357, 1365 (Fed. Cir. 2008). To prevail on the defense of inequitable conduct, the accused infringer must prove that the applicant misrepresented or omitted material information with the specific intent to deceive the PTO. *Id.* The accused infringer must prove both elements—intent and materiality—by clear and convincing evidence. *Id.* If the accused infringer meets its burden, then the district court must weigh the equities to determine whether the applicant's conduct before the PTO warrants rendering the entire patent unenforceable. *Id.*

This court recognizes that the early unclean hands cases do not present any standard for materiality. Needless to say, this court's development of a materiality requirement for inequitable conduct does not (and cannot) supplant Supreme Court precedent. Though inequitable conduct developed from these cases, the unclean hands doctrine remains available to supply a remedy for egregious misconduct like that in the Supreme Court cases.

As inequitable conduct emerged from unclean hands, the standards for intent to deceive and materiality have fluctuated over time. In the past, this court has espoused low standards for meeting the intent requirement, finding it satisfied based on gross negligence or even negligence. This court has also previously adopted a broad view of materiality, using a "reasonable examiner" standard based on the PTO's 1977 amendment to Rule 56. *See Am. Hoist & Derrick Co. v. Sowa & Sons, Inc.*, 725 F.2d 1350, 1362 (Fed. Cir. 1984); *see also* 37 C.F.R. §1.56 (1977) (a reference is material if "there is a substantial likelihood that a reasonable examiner would consider it important in deciding whether to allow the application to issue as a patent"). Further weakening the showing needed to establish inequitable conduct, this court then placed intent and materiality together on a "sliding scale." *Am. Hoist*, 725 F.2d at 1362. This modification to the inequitable conduct doctrine held patents unenforceable based on a reduced showing of intent if the record contained a strong showing of materiality, and vice versa. In effect, this change conflated, and diluted, the standards for both intent and materiality.

Perhaps most importantly, the remedy for inequitable conduct is the "atomic bomb" of patent law. *Aventis Pharma S.A. v. Amphastar Pharm., Inc.*, 525 F.3d 1334, 1349 (Fed. Cir. 2008) (Rader, J., dissenting). Unlike validity defenses, which are claim specific, *see* 35 U.S.C. §288, inequitable conduct regarding any single claim renders the entire patent unenforceable. *Kingsdown Med. Consultants, Ltd. v. Hollister Inc.*, 863 F.2d 867, 877 (Fed. Cir. 1988). Unlike other deficiencies, inequitable conduct cannot be cured by reissue or reexamination. Moreover, the taint of a finding of inequitable conduct can spread from a single patent to render unenforceable other related patents and applications in the same technology family. Thus, a finding of inequitable conduct may endanger a substantial portion of a company's patent portfolio. ...
A finding of inequitabie conduct may also spawn antitrust and unfair competition claims. Further, prevailing on a claim of inequitable conduct often makes a case "exceptional," leading potentially to an award of attomeys' fees under 35 U.S.C. $285. A finding of inequitable conduct may also prove the crime or fraud exception to the attomey-client privilege.

With these far-reaching consequences, it is no wonder that charging inequitable conduct has become a common litigation tactic. One study estimated that eighty percent of patent infringement cases included allegations of inequitable conduct. Committee Position Paper[, The Doctrine of Inequitable Conduct and the Duty of Candor in Patent Prosecution: Its Current Adverse Impact on the Operation of the United States Patent System, 16 AIPLA Q.J. 74, 75 (1988)]; see also Christian Mammen, Controlling the "Plague": Reforming the Doctrine of Inequitable Conduct, 24 BERKELEY TECH. L.J. 1329, 1358 (2009). Inequitable conduct "has been overplayed, is appearing in nearly every patent suit, and is cluttering up the patent system." Kimberly-Clark Corp. v. Johnson \& Johnson, 745 F.2d 1437, 1454 (Fed. Cir. 1984). "[T]he habit of charging inequitable conduct in almost every major patent case has become an absolute plague. Reputable lawyers seem to feel compelled to make the charge against other reputable lawyers on the slenderest grounds, to represent their client's interests adequately, perhaps." Burlington Indus., Inc. v. Dayco Corp., 849 F.2d 1418, 1422 (Fed. Cir. 1988).

Left unfettered, the inequitable conduct doctrine has plagued not only the courts but also the entire patent system. Because allegations of inequitable conduct are routinely brought on "the slenderest grounds," Burlington Indus., 849 F.2d at 1422, patent prosecutors constantly confront the specter of inequitable conduct charges. With inequitable conduct casting the shadow of a hangman's noose, it is unsurprising that patent prosecutors regularly bury PTO examiners with a deluge of prior art references, most of which have marginal value. See Brief for the United States as Amicus Curiae at 17 (submission of nine hundred references without any indication which ones were most relevant); Brief of the Biotechnology Industry Organization as Amicus Curiae at 7 (submission of eighteen pages of cited references, including five pages listing references to claims, office actions, declarations, amendments, interview summaries, and other communications in related applications). "Applicants disclose too much prior art for the PTO to meaningfully consider, and do not explain its significance, all out of fear that to do otherwise risks a claim of inequitable conduct." ABA Section of Intellectual Property Law, A Section White Paper: Agenda for 21st Century Patent Reform 2 (2009). This tidal wave of disclosure makes identifying the most relevant prior art more difficult. See Brief for the United States as Amicus Curiae at 1 (submission of "large numbers of prior art references of questionable materiality . . . harms the effectiveness of the examination process"). "This flood of information strains the agency's examining resources and directly contributes to the backlog." Id. at 17-18.

While honesty at the PTO is essential, low standards for intent and materiality have inadvertently led to many unintended consequences, among them, increased adjudication cost and complexity, reduced likelihood of settlement, burdened courts, strained PTO resources, increased PTO backlog, and impaired patent quality. This court now tightens the standards for finding both intent and materiality in order to redirect a doctrine that has been overused to the detriment of the public.

# V 

To prevail on a claim of inequitable conduct, the accused infringer must prove that the patentee acted with the specific intent to deceive the PTO. A finding that the misrepresentation or omission amounts to gross negligence or negligence under a "should have known" standard does not satisfy this intent requirement. Kingsdown, 863 F. 2 d at 876 . In other words, the accused infringer must prove by clear and convincing evidence that the applicant knew of the reference, knew that it was material, and made a deliberate decision to withhold it. . . .

Intent and materiality are separate requirements. Hoffmann-La Roche, Inc. v. Promega Corp., 323 F.3d 1354, 1359 (Fed. Cir. 2003). A district court should not use a "sliding scale," where a weak showing of intent may be found sufficient based on a strong showing of materiality, and vice versa. Moreover, a district court may not infer intent solely from materiality. Instead, a court must weigh the evidence of intent to deceive independent of its analysis of materiality. Proving that the applicant knew of a reference, should have known of its materiality, and decided not to submit it to the PTO does not prove specific intent to deceive.

Because direct evidence of deceptive intent is rare, a district court may infer intent from indirect and circumstantial evidence. Larson Mfg. Co. of S.D., Inc. v. Aluminart Prods. Ltd., 559 F.3d 1317, 1340 (Fed. Cir. 2009). However, to meet the clear and convincing evidence standard, the specific intent to deceive must be "the single most reasonable inference able to be drawn from the evidence." Star, 537 F.3d at 1366. Indeed, the evidence "must be sufficient to require a finding of deceitful intent in the light of all the circumstances." Kingsdown, 863 F.2d at 873 (emphasis added). Hence, when there are multiple reasonable inferences that may be drawn, intent to deceive cannot be found. This court reviews the district court's factual findings regarding what reasonable inferences may be drawn from the evidence for clear error.

## VI

This court holds that, as a general matter, the materiality required to establish inequitable conduct is but-for materiality. When an applicant fails to disclose prior art to the PTO, that prior art is but-for material if the PTO would not have allowed a claim had it been aware of the undisclosed prior art. Hence, in assessing the materiality of a withheld reference, the court must determine whether the PTO would have allowed the claim if it had been aware of the undisclosed reference. In making this patentability determination, the court should apply the preponderance of the evidence standard and give claims their broadest reasonable construction. See Manual of Patent EXAMINING Procedure ("MPEP") §§706, 2111 (8th ed. Rev.8, July 2010). Often the patentability of a claim will be congruent with the validity determination-if a claim is properly invalidated in district court based on the deliberately withheld reference, then that reference is necessarily material because a finding of invalidity in a district court requires clear and convincing evidence, a higher evidentiary burden than that used in prosecution at the PTO. However, even if a district court does not invalidate a claim based on a deliberately withheld reference, the reference may be material if it would have blocked patent issuance under the PTO's different evidentiary standards.

Because inequitable conduct renders an entire patent (or even a patent family) unenforceable, as a general rule, this doctrine should only be applied in instances where the patentee's misconduct resulted in the unfair benefit of receiving an unwarranted claim.

After all, the patentee obtains no advantage from misconduct if the patent would have issued anyway. Moreover, enforcement of an otherwise valid patent does not injure the public merely because of misconduct, lurking somewhere in patent prosecution, that was immaterial to the patent's issuance.

Although but-for materiality generally must be proved to satisfy the materiality prong of inequitable conduct, this court recognizes an exception in cases of affirmative egregious misconduct. When the patentee has engaged in affirmative acts of egregious misconduct, such as the filing of an unmistakably false affidavit, the misconduct is material. See Rohm \& Haas Co. v. Crystal Chem. Co., 722 F.2d 1556, 1571 (Fed. Cir. 1983) ("there is no room to argue that submission of false affidavits is not material"). After all, a patentee is unlikely to go to great lengths to deceive the PTO with a falsehood unless it believes that the falsehood will affect issuance of the patent. . . .
[T]he general rule requiring but-for materiality provides clear guidance to patent practitioners and courts, while the egregious misconduct exception gives the test sufficient flexibility to capture extraordinary circumstances. Thus, not only is this court's approach sensitive to varied facts and equitable considerations, it is also consistent with the early unclean hands cases-all of which dealt with egregious misconduct.

# VII 

On remand, the district court should determine whether the PTO would not have granted the patent but for Abbott's failure to disclose the EPO briefs. In particular, the district court must determine whether the PTO would have found Sanghera's declaration and Pope's accompanying submission unpersuasive in overcoming the obviousness rejection over the ' 382 patent if Abbott had disclosed the EPO briefs. Because the district court did not find intent to deceive under the knowing and deliberate standard set forth in this opinion, this court vacates the district court's findings of intent. On remand, the district court should determine whether there is clear and convincing evidence demonstrating that Sanghera or Pope knew of the EPO briefs, knew of their materiality, and made the conscious decision not to disclose them in order to deceive the PTO.

## COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS

1. Judge Bryson, joinied by Judges Gajarsa, Dyk, and Prost dissented. See Therasense, Inc. v. Becton, Dickinson and Co., 649 F.3d 1276, 1302-20 (Fed. Cir. 2011) (Bryson, J., dissenting). While acknowledging that the law of inequitable conduct was in an unsatisfactory state and needs adjustment, the dissenters considered the majority's solution too restrictive to serve the doctrine's purposes. They instead advocated: (1)
requiring proof, by clear and convincing evidence, that the applicant or attorney intended to mislead the PTO with respect to a material matter; (2) measuring materiality by the PTO's disclosure standards (see 37 C.F.R. $1.56 Duty to Disclose Information Material to Patentability (requiring proof that the information at issue either established, by itself or in combination with other information, a prima facie case of unpatentability, or was inconsistent with a position taken by the applicant before the PTO with respect to patentability)); and (3) requiring intent to mislead and materiality to be proved separately, i.e., without a sliding scale.

In a partial concurrence emphasizing the equitable nature of the inequitable conduct doctrine, Judge O'Malley urged affording district courts greater flexibility than either the majority or the dissent in applying the doctrine. See Therasense, Inc. v. Becton, Dickinson and Co., 649 F.3d 1296- (Fed. Cir. 2011) (O'Malley, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part). She agreed with the majority's holding that a district court must find that the conduct at issue is of "sufficient culpability to require a finding of intent to deceive." Kingsdown Med. Consultants, Ltd. v. Hollister Inc., 863 F.2d 867, 876 (Fed.Cir.1988). In making this determination, intent to deceive and materiality must be found separately. District courts may not employ a "sliding scale," nor may they infer intent from materiality alone. They may, however, infer intent from indirect and circumstantial evidence, but only where it is "the single most reasonable inference able to be drawn from the evidence."

Which approach-majority, dissent, or partial concurrence-do you find most persuasive?
2. Notwithstanding the majority's effort to tighten the inequitable conduct doctrine, the district court on remand in Therasense once again found inequitable conduct under the new standard. Based on the facts provided, does that decision comport with the Federal Circuit's standard?

After Therasense, allegations of inequitable conduct dropped significantly. See Robert Swanson, The Exergen and Therasense Effects, 66 STAN. L. REV. 695 (2014). But the Federal Circuit continues to find inequitable conduct in some circumstances. In Belcher Pharms. v. Hospira, Inc., 11 F.4th 1345 (Fed. Cir. 2021), for example, the patentee told the FDA that its reformulated epinephrine with a pH of 2.8-3.3 was "old" and "a very minor change." But it told the PTO that reducing the pH to that range was its critical invention, and didn't disclose its contrary statement to the FDA. The Federal Circuit found an intent to deceive the only reasonable inference, particularly because the same person made both representations. See id. at 1353-54.
3. Why is the penalty for inequitable conduct stronger than the penalty for invalidity-rendering the patent as a whole unenforceable rather than just the tainted claim? Who has more information about the inventor's work and the precise prior art it relates to-the examiner or the inventor? Who has more to gain from the issuance (or rejection) of a patent?

How harsh is unenforceability really? If a patentee knows their application will be rejected in its entirety if they disclose a key piece of prior art, are they any worse off with unenforceability than if they had never obtained the patent in the first place? See Tun-Jen Chiang, The Upside-Down Inequitable Conduct Doctrine, 107 NW. U. L. REV. 1243 (2013) (arguing that inequitable conduct under-deters the most egregious cases of abuse while overdeterring marginal ones).
4. Many inequitable conduct cases involve suppressing a key prior art reference. It is important to note, however, that only prior art that was known by the inventor or the patent lawyer gives rise to a duty of disclosure. This rule is embodied not only in the doctrine of inequitable conduct in the courts, but also in Rule 56 of the rules of the patent practice, pertaining to the duty of patent applicants during prosecution. See 37 C.F.R. §1.56 (a) ("Each individual associated with the filing and prosecution of a patent application has a duty of candor and good faith in dealing with the [patent] office, which includes a duty to disclose to the office all information known to that individual to be material to patentability . . .") (emphasis added). Note that this means that patentees do not have to conduct a prior art search. But if they know about prior art, it must be disclosed. Do you think it should matter whether (1) the reference was in a class or group that the Examiner should have searched? (2) that it was disclosed, but in a long "string cite" of less relevant prior art? (3) that the patentee didn't know of the key reference, but should have?
5. Supplemental Examination. Patent owners have long sought to reduce the impact of the inequitable conduct defense. The AIA provides another procedure for doing so. According to the House Report accompanying the AIA:

The Act addresses the inequitable conduct doctrine by authorizing supplemental examination of a patent to correct errors or omissions in proceedings before the Office. Under this new procedure, information that was not considered or was inadequately considered or was incorrect can be presented to the Office. If the Office determines that the information does not present a substantial new question of patentability or that the patent is still valid, that information cannot later be used to hold the patent unenforceable or invalid on the basis for an inequitable-conduct attack in civil litigation.
Committee on the Judiciary, U.S. Cong., "America Invents Act," H.R. REP. No 112-98, 112th Cong., 1st Sess., at 50 (June 1, 2011). Section 257(c)(1) provides that A patent shall not be held unenforceable on the basis of conduct relating to information that had not been considered, was inadequately considered, or was incorrect in a prior examination of the patent if the information was considered, reconsidered, or corrected during a supplemental examination of the patent.
If the PTO decides that the newly submitted information in supplemental examination presents a substantial new question of patentability with respect to one or more of the petitioner's claims, it may order a reexamination of those claims.
