
Today, every one of the United States protects trade secrets. Improper use or disclosure of a trade secret was traditionally a common law tort. The Uniform Trade SECRETS ACT has come to unify trade secret protection notwithstanding its predominately state law foundation. THE RESTATEMENT OF TORTS, §§757,758 as well as the RESTATEMENT (THIRD) OF UNFAIR COMPETITION also serve as valuable sources for navigating trade secret protection.

Only New York has not adopted the UTSA, although some states, like North Carolina, adopted a modified version of the UTSA. New York protects trade secrets under common law, applying the RESTATEMENT OF TORTS framework. Because of the UNIFORM ACT's importance, we reproduce its primary provisions here.

## Uniform Trade Secrets Act, with 1985 Amendments


As used in this [Act], unless the context requires otherwise:
(1) "Improper means" includes theft, bribery, misrepresentation, breach or inducement of a breach of a duty to maintain secrecy, or espionage through electronic or other means;
(2) "Misappropriation" means:
(i) acquisition of a trade secret of another by a person who knows or has reason to know that the trade secret was acquired by improper means; or (ii) disclosure or use of a trade secret of another without express or implied consent by a person who (A) used improper means to acquire knowledge of the trade secret; or (B) at the time of disclosure or use, knew or had reason to know that his knowledge of the trade secret was (I) derived from or through a person who had utilized improper means to acquire it;
(II) acquired under circumstances giving rise to a duty to maintain its secrecy or limit its use; or (III) derived from or through a person who owed a duty to the person seeking relief to maintain its secrecy or limit its use; or (C) before a material change of his [or her] position, knew or had reason to know that it was a trade secret and that knowledge of it had been acquired by accident or mistake. . . .
(4) "Trade secret" means information, including a formula, pattern, compilation, program, device, method, technique, or process, that:
(i) derives independent economic value, actual or potential, from not being generally known to, and not being readily ascertainable by proper means by, other persons who can obtain economic value from its disclosure or use, and (ii) is the subject of efforts that are reasonable under the circumstances to maintain its secrecy.
The federal Defend Trade Secrets Act, enacted in 2016, was "modeled on the Uniform Trade Secrets Act," H. Rep. No. 114-529, 114th Cong., 2D Sess., Defense Secrets ACT OF 2016 (2016). It defines trade secret misappropriation using the language of the UTSA. The DTSA augments the UTSA by defining "improper means":
(A) includes theft, bribery, misrepresentation, breach or inducement of a breach of a duty to maintain secrecy, or espionage through electronic or other means; and (B) does not include reverse engineering, independent derivation, or any other lawful means of acquisition.
The federal definition of secrecy, while still broad, is narrower than the UTSA, limiting the reach of the law to certain types of information:
the term "trade secret" means all forms and types of financial, business, scientific, technical, economic, or engineering information, including patterns, plans, compilations, program devices, formulas, designs, prototypes, methods, techniques, processes, procedures, programs, or codes, whether tangible or intangible, and whether or how stored, compiled, or memorialized physically, electronically, graphically, photographically, or in writing if- (A) the owner thereof has taken reasonable measures to keep such information secret; and (B) the information derives independent economic value, actual or potential, from not being generally known to, and not being readily ascertainable through proper means by, another person who can obtain economic value from the disclosure or use of the information.
18 U.S.C. §1839(3).
Is there any practical difference between these definitions? Texas took the adoption of the federal law as evidence of disuniformity, modifying its version of the UTSA in 2017 to adopt the definition of a trade secret in the DTSA (itself held over from the ECONOMIC ESPIONAGE ACT) rather than conforming to the laws of other states.
A trade secret claim can be broken down into three essential elements. First, the subject matter involved must qualify for trade secret protection: it must be the type of knowledge or information that trade secret law was meant to protect, and it must not be generally known to all. On eligible subject matter, the current trend, exemplified by the UTSA, is to protect as a trade secret any valuable information so long as the information is capable of adding economic value to the owner. The requirement that the information not be generally known follows from the label trade "secret." The requirement is meant to ensure that no one claims intellectual property protection for information commonly known in a trade or industry.

The second element is that the holder of the trade secret took reasonable precautions under the circumstances to prevent its disclosure. Courts have varied in their rationale for this requirement. Some view it as evidence that the trade secret is valuable enough to bother litigating; others reason that where the plaintiff has taken reasonable precautions, the defendant likely acquired the trade secret wrongfully. Whatever the justification, it is clear that no one may let information about products and operations flow freely to competitors at one time and then later claim that competitors have wrongfully acquired valuable trade secrets. To establish the right, one must be diligent in protecting information. As always, however, the presence of the term "reasonable" ensures close cases and difficult line-drawing for courts, a theme reflected in several of the cases that follow.

Finally, a trade secret plaintiff must prove that the defendant acquired the information wrongfully-in a word, that the defendant misappropriated the trade secret. Just because a person's information is valuable does not make it wrong for another to use it or disclose it. But use or disclosure is wrongful when the information is acquired through deception, skullduggery, or outright theft. Close cases abound because of competitors' ingenuity in rooting out information about their rivals' businesses and products.

Most trade secret cases arise not from skullduggery by outsiders but from breach of an obligation to the trade secret holder not to disclose or appropriate the trade secret. Such an obligation can arise by express contract or an implied duty. Even in the absence of an express contract, most employees are held to have a duty to protect their employers' interests in their secret practices and information. Even where the duty arises by explicit contract, however, public policy limitations on the scope and duration of the agreement will often come into play, in some cases resulting in substantial judicial modification of the explicit obligations laid out in the contract.

The Defend Trade Secrets Act of 2016 added an important limitation on trade secret protection: an express immunity from suit for whistleblowers, employees and contractors who disclose suspected illegal activity to the government and their attorney confidentially. See 18 U.S.C. §1833 (b). This limitation on trade secret protection promotes the social interest in rooting out and deterring corporate fraud and other forms of illegal activity.

The United States pioneered modern trade secret law, and other countries have followed suit. The EU Trade Secrets Directive, for instance, largely tracks the UTSA definitions of secrecy, reasonable efforts, and misappropriation. See Council Directive 2016/943, art. 2-5, 2016 O.J. (L 157/1) 1 (EC).
