
The most common allegation of trade secret misappropriation involves breach of a confidential relationship. See David S. Almeling et al., A Statistical Analysis of Trade Secret Litigation in State Courts, 46 GONZ. L. REV. 57, 59 (2011) (reporting that 93 percent of all trade secret cases are between parties who know each other). The RESTATEMENT (THIRD) OF UNFAIR COMPETITION ยง41 explains that a confidential relationship is established in the following circumstances:
(a) the person made an express promise of confidentiality prior to the disclosure of the trade secret; or (b) the trade secret was disclosed to the person under circumstances in which the relationship between the parties to the disclosure or the other facts surrounding the disclosure justify the conclusions that, at the time of the disclosure, (1) the person knew or had reason to know that the disclosure was intended to be in confidence, and (2) the other party to the disclosure was reasonable in inferring that the person consented to an obligation of confidentiality.

## Smith v. Dravo Corp. <br> United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit 203 F.2d 369 (7th Cir. 1953)

LINDLEY, CIRCUIT JUDGE:
Plaintiffs appeal from a judgment for defendant entered at the close of a trial by the court without a jury. The complaint is in four counts: 1 and 2 charge an unlawful appropriation by defendant of plaintiffs' trade secrets relating to the design and construction and selling and leasing of freight containers; 3 and 4 aver infringement of plaintiffs' patents Nos. 2,457,841 and 2,457,842. . . .

In the early 1940s Leathem D. Smith, now deceased, began toying with an idea which, he believed, would greatly facilitate the ship and shore handling and transportation of cargoes. As he was primarily engaged in the shipbuilding business, it was quite natural that his thinking was chiefly concerned with water transportation and dock handling. Nevertheless his overall plan encompassed rail shipping as well. He envisioned construction of ships especially designed to carry their cargo in uniformly sized steel freight containers. These devices (which, it appears, were the crux of his idea) were: equipped with high doors at one end; large enough for a man to enter easily; weather and pilfer proof; and bore collapsible legs, which (1) served to lock them (a) to the deckof the ship by fitting into recesses in the deck, or (b) to each other, when stacked, by reason of receiving sockets located in the upper four corners of each container, and (2) allowed sufficient clearance between deck and container or container and container for the facile insertion of a fork of a lift tractor, and (3) were equipped with lifting eyelets, which, together with a specially designed hoist, made possible placement of the containers upon or removal from a ship, railroad car or truck, while filled with cargo. The outer dimensions of the devices were such that they would fit compactly in standard gauge North American railroad cars, or narrow gauge South American trains, and in the holds of most water vessels.
[At the end of World War II, Smith's company-Safeway Containers-had some success building and selling such containers.]

On June 23, 1946, Smith died in a sailing accident. The need for cash for inheritance tax purposes prompted his estate to survey his holdings for disposable assets. It was decided that the container business should be sold. Devices in process were completed but no work on new ones was started.

Defendant was interested in the Safeway container, primarily, it appears, for use by its subsidiary, the Union Barge Lines. In October 1946 it contacted Agwilines [one of Smith's customers] seeking information. It watched a loading operation in which Agwilines used the box. At approximately the same time, defendant approached the shipbuilding company and inquired as to the possibility of purchase of a number of the containers. It was told to communicate with Cowan, plaintiffs' eastern representative. This it did, and, on October 29, 1946, in Pittsburgh, Cowan met with defendant's officials to discuss the proposed sale of [containers]. But, as negotiations progressed, defendant demonstrated an interest in the entire container development. Thus, what started as a meeting to discuss the purchase of individual containers ended in the possible foundation for a sale of the entire business.

Based upon this display of interest, Cowan sent detailed information to defendant concerning the business. This included: (1) patent applications for both the "knockdown" and "rigid" crates; (2) blue prints of both designs; (3) a miniature Safeway container; (4) letters of inquiry from possible users; (5) further correspondence with prospective users. In addition, defendant's representatives journeyed to Sturgeon Bay, Wisconsin, the home of the shipbuilding company, and viewed the physical plant, inventory and manufacturing operation.

Plaintiffs quoted a price of $150,000 plus a royalty of $10 per unit. This was rejected. Subsequent offers of $100,000 and $75,000 with royalties of $10 per container were also rejected. Negotiations continued until January 30, 1947, at which time defendant finally rejected plaintiffs' offer.

On January 31, 1947 defendant announced to Agwilines that it "intended to design and produce a shipping container of the widest possible utility" for "coastal steamship application . . . [and] use . . . on the inland rivers and . . . connecting highway and rail carriers." Development of the project moved rapidly, so that by February 5, 1947 defendant had set up a stock order for a freight container which was designed, by use of plaintiffs' patent applications, so as to avoid any claim of infringement. One differing feature was the use of skids and recesses running the length of the container, rather than legs and sockets as employed in plaintiffs' design. However, Agwilines rejected this design, insisting on an adaptation of plaintiffs' idea. In short defendant's final product incorporated many, if not all, of the features of plaintiffs' design. So conceived, it was accepted by the trade to the extent that, by March 1948, defendant had sold some 500 containers. Many of these sales were made to firms who had shown considerable prior interest in plaintiffs' design and had been included in the prospective users disclosed to defendant.

One particular feature of defendant's container differed from plaintiffs: its width was four inches less. As a result plaintiffs' product became obsolete. Their container could not be used interchangeably with defendant's; they ceased production. Consequently the prospects of disposing of the entire operation vanished.

The foregoing is the essence of plaintiffs' cause of action. Stripped of surplusage, the averment is that defendant obtained, through a confidential relationship, knowledge of plaintiffs' secret designs, plans and prospective customers, and then wrongfully breached that confidence by using the information to its own advantage and plaintiffs' detriment.
[The court found that, notwithstanding certain disclosures of information during the operation of Safeway, plaintiffs' information about how to design its containers remained a trade secret.]
(1) Was Defendant in a Position of Trust and Confidence at the Time of the Disclosure?
Mr. Justice Holmes once said that the existence of the confidential relationship is the "starting point" in a cause of action such as this. E.I. DuPont de Nemours Powder Co. v. Masland, 244 U.S. 100, 102 [1917]. While we take a slightly different tack, there is no doubt as to the importance of this element of plaintiffs' case.

Certain it is that a non-confidential disclosure will not supply the basis for a law suit. Plaintiffs' information is afforded protection because it is secret. Promiscuous disclosures quite naturally destroy the secrecy and the corresponding protection. But this is not true where a confidence has been reposed carrying with it communication of an idea.

It is clear that no express promise of trust was exacted from defendant. There is, however, the further question of whether one was implied from the relationship of the parties. Pennsylvania has not provided us with a decision precisely in point but Pressed Steel Car Co. v. Standard Car Co., 210 Pa. 464, 60 A. 4, furnishes abundant guideposts. There plaintiff delivered its blue prints to customers in order that they might acquaint themselves more thoroughly with the railroad cars they were purchasing; from these customers, defendant obtained the drawings. In holding that the customers held the plans as a result of a confidence reposed in them by plaintiff, and that the confidence was breached by delivery of the blue prints to defendant, the court said, 60 A . at page 10 : "While there was no expressed restriction placed on the ownership of the prints, or any expressed limitation as to the use to which they were to be put, it is clear . . . that the purpose for which they were delivered by the plaintiff was understood by all parties."

The quoted language is applicable and determinative. Here plaintiffs disclosed their design for one purpose, to enable defendant to appraise it with a view in mind of purchasing the business. There can be no question that defendant knew and understood this limited purpose. Trust was reposed in it by plaintiffs that the information thus transmitted would be accepted subject to that limitation. "[T]he first thing to be made sure of is that the defendant shall not fraudulently abuse the trust reposed in him. It is the usual incident of confidential relations. If there is any disadvantage in the fact that he knew the plaintiffs' secrets, he must take the burden with the good." E.I. DuPont de Nemours Powder Co. v. Masland, 244 U.S. 100,102.

Nor is it an adequate answer for defendant to say that the transactions with plaintiffs were at arm's length. So, too, were the overall dealings between plaintiffs and defendants in Booth v. Stutz Motor Car Co., 7 Cir., 56 F.2d 962; Allen-Qualley Co. v. Shellmar Products Co., D.C., 31 F.2d 293, affirmed, 7 Cir., 36 F.2d 623 and Schavoir v. American Rebonded Leather Co., 104 Conn. 472, 133 A. 582. That fact does not detract from the conclusion that but for those very transactions defendant would not have learned, from plaintiffs, of the container design. The implied limitation on the use to be made of the information had its roots in the "arms-length" transaction.

# (2) The Improper Use by Defendant of the Secret Information 

Defendant's own evidence discloses that it did not begin to design its container until after it had access to plaintiffs' plans. Defendant's engineers admittedly referred to plaintiffs' patent applications, as they said, to avoid infringement. It is not disputed that, at the urging of Agwilines, defendant revised its proposed design to incorporate the folding leg and socket principles of plaintiffs' containers. These evidentiary facts, together with the striking similarity between defendant's and plaintiffs' finished product, were more than enough to convict defendant of the improper use of the structural information obtained from plaintiffs.

## COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS

1. Since the shipping containers were available on the open market, couldn't Dravo have argued that they were not a trade secret? Did Smith's agent, Cowan, disclose any thing that was not readily apparent from inspection of the containers? For more on the history of containerization, see Marc Levinson, The Box: How The Shipping Container Made the World Smaller and the World Economy BigGER (2008) (mentioning Dravo Corporation container as early precursor of containerization).
2. In Van Prods. Co. v. General Welding \& Fabricating Co., 213 A.2d 769, 779-80 (Pa. 1965), the Pennsylvania Supreme Court criticized Smith for focusing on the existence of a confidential relationship to the exclusion of whether there was a trade secret at all. The court said: "The starting point in every case of this sort is not whether there was a confidential relationship, but whether, in fact, there was a trade secret to be misappropriated." But where there is a secret, a company that receives the secret in a business negotiation and then uses it without paying can be guilty of misappropriating that secret. See Altavion Inc. v. Konica Minolta Sys. Lab. Inc., 171 Cal.Rptr.3d 714 (Cal. Ct. App. 2014).
3. Compare Smith v. Dravo with Omnitech Int'l v. Clorox Co., 29 U.S.P.Q.2d 1665 (5th Cir. 1994), where the court held that it was not an actionable "use" of a trade secret for the defendant to evaluate it in the course of trying to decide whether to (a) acquire the company or (b) take a license to use the trade secret. A finding of no liability here makes sense, because it allows the potential licensee to make an informed judgment and therefore promotes efficient licensing. But how far does it extend? Is the potential licensee entitled to replicate the research or build models in an effort to evaluate it? Are there special limits that should be placed on companies engaged in a "make or buy" decision-that is, who are considering either licensing the plaintiff's technology or entering the market themselves?

Smith and Omnitech both involved disclosures in the course of licensing negotiations. Cases such as these form part of the amorphous law of "precontractual liability." See E. Allen Farnsworth, Precontractual Liability and Preliminary Agreements: Fair Dealing and Failed Negotiations, 87 Colum. L. Rev. 217 (1987). Both the Smith and Omnitech cases present the problem of Arrow's Information Paradox. What the plaintiff has to sell to the defendant is information that is valuable only because it is secret. If there is no legal protection and if the plaintiff discloses the secret to the defendant, its value will be lost. But the defendant cannot be expected to pay for information unless it can see the information to determine its value. Thus, absent some form of legal protection for confidential disclosures, sale or licensing of trade secrets may not occur. Note that this problem does not arise in other areas of intellectual property, such as patent law, since the inventions being licensed are already publicly disclosed.
4. The court in Bateman v. Mnemonics, Inc., 79 F.3d 1532 (11th Cir. 1996), indicated that it was "wary" of trade secret claims based on implied confidential relationships because such claims were subject to abuse. The court rejected Bateman's allegation that such a relationship existed because Bateman had not "made it clear to the parties involved that there was an expectation and obligation of confidentiality." Thus, the court seemed to create a standard of actual knowledge on the part of the recipient of confidential information that the discloser of such information intended the disclosure to be confidential. At the other extreme, the Fifth Circuit in Phillips v. Frey, 20 F.3d 623, 631-32 (5th Cir. 1994) found an implied confidential relationship to exist in the course of negotiations over the sale of a business despite the fact that the disclosing party never even requested that the information remain confidential.

Which approach makes more sense? Who is in the best position to clarify the question, the discloser or the recipient?

Is there any way for a potential licensee to prevent the formation of a confidential relationship in such a situation?
5. The defendant in Smith actually sold a device that was not identical to the plaintiff's. Under what circumstances can a defendant be liable for misappropriation without literally copying the trade secret? In Mangren Res. \& Dev. Corp. v. National Chem. Co., 87 F.3d 1339 (7th Cir. 1996), the court defined improper "use" broadly, stating that "the user of another's trade secret is liable even if he uses it with modifications or improvements upon it effected by his own efforts, so long as the substance of the process used by the actor is derived from the other's secret If trade secret law were not flexible enough to encompass modified or even new products that are substantially derived from the trade secrets of another, the protections that the law provides would be hollow indeed." To similar effect as Mangren is Texas Tanks Inc. v. Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp., 99 F.3d 740 (5th Cir. 1997). In Texas Tanks, the Fifth Circuit held that any improper "exercise of control and domination" over a secret constituted a commercial use of that secret. It rejected the defendant's argument that it could not be liable for taking a secret unless the secret was actually incorporated in a commercial product. The court noted that Owens Corning's awareness of the secret would likely influence the development of its own competing product, and that this was enough to demonstrate improper "use" of the secret. And in Collelo v. Geographic Servs., Inc., 283 Va. 56 (2012), the Virginia Supreme Court held that a party could be liable for trade secret misappropriation even though it did not compete with the plaintiff so long as the plaintiff could show injury. See Mark A. Lemley, The Fruit of the Poisonous Tree in IP Law, 103 Iowa L. Rev. 245, 250-53 (2017).
6. Use of a Trade Secret Without Consent. There are three ways to establish misappropriation under the DTSA: improper acquisition, disclosure, or use of a trade secret without consent. 18 U.S.C. ยง1839(5). In Oakwood Laboratories LLC v. Thanoo, 999 F.3d 892 (3d Cir. 2021), the Third Circuit construed the DTSA expansively, as covering any exploitation of the trade secret that is likely to result in injury to the trade secret owner or enrichment to the defendant[.] . . . Thus, marketing goods that embody the trade secret, employing the trade secret in manufacturing or production, relying on the trade secret to assist or accelerate research or development, or soliciting customers through the use of information that is a trade secret . . . all constitute 'use.'"

Based on this broad definition, the court overturned the district court's dismissal of a trade secret complaint for failure to state a cause of action on the ground that the plaintiff had not sufficiently alleged use of a trade secret. The Third Circuit faulted the district court for requiring that Oakwood explain how defendants used the trade secrets and equating "use" of a trade secret with "replication" of the trade secret process or technology. It was sufficient for Oakwood to allege that Dr. Thanoo-who had served for an extensive period as the Oakwood's Vice President of Product Development during the time that it developed a costly, labor-intensive, two-decade long bioequivalent research project-joined a company that developed a comparable project in just a few years. While there was no direct allegation that the defendants used any of plaintiff's secrets, the court held that use could be inferred from the circumstances. Taking the allegations of the complaint as true, the Third Circuit noted that "use" of Oakwood's trade secret information could readily be understood from the timing of Dr.
Thanoo's employment with the competitor Aurobindo, Dr. Thanoo's deception in informing Oakwood about the work he would engage in at Aurobindo, Aurobindo's lack of experience in the highly specialized field of microsphere technology, Aurobindo's access to Oakwood's trade secret information, its rapid success in developing four microsphere products, and the comparatively insignificant financial investment Aurobindo put into that development.

The Third Circuit also faulted the district court for holding that Oakwood had not adequately pled harm: "Defendants have not launched any products . . . Oakwood has not yet suffered any harm from missed partnerships or investment opportunities." The Third Circuit ruled that "trade secret misappropriation is harm. See 18 U.S.C. ยง1839(3), (5)."
7. Accident or Mistake. In a high-profile incident, an Apple employee left an early prototype of the new iPhone in a bar, where it was found by a reporter. Is the reporter free to write about the new prototype? Would it matter if it was found by a competitor? See Greg Sandoval \& Declan McCullagh, Apple Loses Another Unreleased iPhone (exclusive), CNET (Aug, 31, 2011) (noting that California imposes liability for theft upon any person who finds lost and appropriates property if the person knows who the owner is likely to be).

The UTSA extends liability to anyone who uses or discloses a trade secret that they knew or should have known was acquired by "accident or mistake." That same mental standard-negligence-applies to trade secret misappropriation more generally. See Charles Tait Graves, Intentionality in Trade Secret Law, 39 BERKELEY TECH. L.J. 731 (2024).

# PROBLEMS 

Problem II-10. Solomon, a regular customer of ToolCo's products, comes up with an idea for a new tool. He sends the idea to ToolCo, suggesting that they manufacture it. ToolCo does in fact produce and sell the new tool. Is Solomon entitled to compensation for ToolCo's use of his idea? Does it make any difference if (1) ToolCo actively solicited the idea from Solomon? (2) Solomon sent the suggestion to ToolCo along with a letter saying he wanted to open negotiations over a possible licensing arrangement to use the idea? (3) ToolCo has in the past had an informal, unwritten policy of compensating inventors who submit good ideas?

Problem II-11. VenCo, a venture capitalist in the business of financing start-up companies, investigates TechCo in an effort to decide whether or not to finance it. To aid in its investigation, VenCo asks for and receives confidential information about TechCo's products and market position. VenCo eventually decides not to finance TechCo because of concerns about its management, but it does finance a start-up competitor of TechCo in the same field. Are VenCo or the start-up liable to TechCo? What obligations, if any, does VenCo undertake as a result of its exposure to TechCo's secrets?
Problem II-12. Falcon Systems employs Kotva as a sales representative. In the course of her work for Falcon, Kotva comes into contact with a large number of actual and potential customers. Some are leads provided by Falcon, while others she develops on her own. To manage her connections, she uses LinkedIn, which allows people to record and build business connections. Kotva uses LinkedIn for all her connections, business as well as personal.

When Kotva leaves Falcon to take a job with a competitor, Falcon argues that her LinkedIn "connections" are effectively a customer list and belong to the company. They insist that she delete her LinkedIn account, or alternatively eliminate any job-related contacts from the site. How should the court rule?
