
The common law defense of laches bars suit where a plaintiff unreasonably delays in pursuing legal recourse and such delay materially prejudices the defendant. This defense had long been recognized in patent law. See A.C. Aukerman Co. v. R.L. Chailes Construction Co., 960 F.2d 1020 (Fed. Cir. 1992). In SCA Hygiene Products Ahticbolag v. First Quality Baby Products, LLC, 580 U.S. 328 (2017), the Supreme Court held that because of the Patent Act's statute of limitations ( $286 ), the common law defense of laches cannot preclude a claim for damages incurred within the six-year limitations period. At the same time, the Supreme Court recognized the continued viability of equitable estoppel. Equitable estoppel arises where a patentee misleads an alleged infringer into believing that she would not be sued for using the patented technology.
The defense may bar all relief on an infringement claim. See A.C. Aukerman Co. v. R.L. Chaides Constr. Co., 960 F.2d 1020, 1041 (Fed. Cir. 1992) (en banc). Three elements must be established to prove equitable estoppel:
(1) The actor, who usually must have knowledge of the true facts, communicates something in a misleading way, either by words, conduct or silence.
(2) The other relies upon that communication.
(3) And the other would be harmed materially if the actor is later permitted to assert any claim inconsistent with his earlier conduct.
Id. (quoting D.B. DOBBS, HANDBOOK ON THE LAW OF REMEDIES ยง2.3, at 42 (1973)). In the patent infringement context, the "something" communicated is that the plaintiff will not bring an infringement claim against the accused infringer. Accordingly, the defendant must not only be aware of the patentee and/or his patent but also know or reasonably be able to infer that the patentee has been aware of the accused infringer's acts for some time. A plaintiff's inaction may give rise to the inference that the infringement claim was abandoned based on other facts regarding the parties' relationship or contracts with each other. Regarding the third factor, material harm may include a change of economic position or loss of evidence.

Even where the defendant proves all three elements of the estoppel defense, the court must consider "any other evidence and facts respecting the equitics of the parties in exercising its discretion and deciding whether to allow the defense of equitable estoppel to bar the suit." Id. at 1043. The defense does not require an unreasonable delay in filing suit. However, such a delay may be evidence relevant to determining whether the plaintiff's conduct was misleading.
