
The idea that information should be protected against "theft" (which may include the physical taking of tangible goods containing information or simply the copying or memorization of data) is a venerable one in the law. One scholar traces the earliest legal protection against "misappropriation of trade secrets" to the Roman Empire. See A. Arthur Schiller, Trade Secrets and the Roman Law: The Actio Servi Corrupti, 30 Colum. L. Rev. 837 (1930). ^1 The Roman courts created a cause of action called "actio servi corrupti"-literally, an action for corrupting a slave. According to Schiller, the actio servi corrupti was used to protect slave owners from third parties who would "corrupt" slaves (by bribery or intimidation) into disclosing their owners' confidential business information. The law made such third parties liable to the slave owner for twice the damages he suffered as a result of the disclosure.

While scholarship has cast some doubt on the enforcement of trade secret protection in the Roman Empire, see Alan Watson, Trade Secrets and Roman Law: The Myth Exploded, 11 Tul. Eur. \& Civ. L.F. 19 (1996), the concept that so-called business or "trade secrets" were entitled to legal protection spread rapidly throughout the world. As early as the Renaissance, most European nation-states had laws that protected businesses (notably, the guild cartels) from those who used their secret processes and ideas without permission.

In preindustrial economies, craftsmen passed along their knowledge of the trade to their apprentice with the understanding that the know-how would be kept secret during the apprenticeship period. See Catherine L. Fisk, Working Knowledge: Trade Secrets, Restrictive Covenants in Employment, and the Rise of Corporate Intellectual Property, 1800-1920, 52 Hastings L.J. 441, 450-51 (2001). After this training, the apprentice was free to practice the trade. These protections were reinforced by custom, trade guilds, and close-knit communities. See Carlo M. Cipolla, Before The Industrial Revolution: European Economy and Society 1000-1700 (2d ed. 1980).

This informal system, governed principally through social norms and restrictions on apprentice mobility through mandatory periods of service, eroded as industrialization shifted production to factories and labor mobility increased in the early nineteenth century. Factories operated on a far larger scale than traditional craft enterprises and without the social and guild constraints on the dissemination of proprietary techniques and know-how. While patents afforded protection for larger, discrete advances, smallerbore, incremental know-how was more vulnerable to misappropriation in the impersonal, specialized factory setting. Factory owners in England pressed for a broader form of protection for workplace trade secrets. The know-how behind industrial processes gradually gained recognition and enforcement by common law courts. See Newbery v. James, 35 Eng. Rep. 1011, 1011-12 (Ch.) (1817); Fisk, supra, at 450-88.

The practice spread to the United States by the mid-nineteenth century and developed rapidly in the common law. See Vickery v. Welch, 36 Mass. (19 Pick.) 523, 525-27 (1837).

Trade secret protection could encompass information that was not generally known to the public so long as the employer undertook reasonable precautions to preserve secrecy. This latter requirement brought non-disclosure agreements ("NDAs") into common practice. Failure to guard against disclosure of trade secrets by employees and contractors would jeopardize trade secret protection.

The emerging law of trade secrets was collected in the Restatement of Torts, published in 1939. The RESTATEMENT protected as a trade secret any information "used in one's business" that gives its owner "an opportunity to obtain an advantage over competitors who do not know or use it," so long as the information was in fact a secret. When the Restatement (SECOND) of Torts was published in 1979, the authors omitted the trade secrets provisions on the grounds that the law of trade secrets had developed into an independent body of law that no longer relied on general principles of tort law. Nonetheless, the original RESTATEMENT has remained influential because so many judicial decisions have relied on it, and statutes and other key sources have integrated its tenets.

By the mid-twentieth century, "the body of state and federal law that ha[d] traditionally coped with [industrial espionage] languish[ed] in a deepening maze of conflict and confusion." See Note, Theft of Trade Secrets: The Need for a Statutory Solution, 120 U. PA. L. REV. 378 (1971). Recognizing this doctrinal muddle and the growing economic importance of trade secret protection, the American Bar Association established a special committee to investigate the drafting of a uniform trade secret act to harmonize protection among the states in 1968. Over the course of the next decade, that committee drafted and refined the Uniform State Trade Secrets Act (UTSA), which the National Commission on Uniform State Laws promulgated in 1979. The UTSA has since been adopted by every state except New York. In the 1990s, the American Law Institute integrated trade secret law into the Restatement (Third) of Unfair COMPetition. In 2016, Congress enacted the Defend Trade Secrets Act, which brought uniformity of federal law without significantly changing the rules that have developed under state law. Before turning to these modern sources of trade secret protection, it will useful to examine the principles undergirding trade secret protection.


^1 Trade secrets may have existed before this time, albeit in unusual forms. See Mark C. Suchman, Invention and Ritual: Notes on the Interrelation of Magic and Intellectual Property in Preliterate Societies, 89 Colum. L. Rev. 1264, 1274 (1989).