By contrast with trade secret law, which draws on a number of different (and sometimes contradictory) theoretical bases, the central theory behind patent law is relatively straightforward. This theory posits that inventions are public goods that are costly to make and that are difficult to control once they are released into the world. As a result, absent patent protection inventors will not have sufficient incentive to invest in creating, developing, and marketing new products. Patent law provides a market-driven incentive to invest in innovation, by allowing the inventor to appropriate some of the economic benefits of her invention. An alternative to classical incentive theory is the prospect theory of patents. See Edmund Kitch, The Nature and Function of the Patent System, 30 J.L. & ECON. 265 (1977). Kitch offers a property-based vision of patents as entitlements to innovate within a particular field, granted to those who have already started such innovation to encourage, not invention, but commercialization of technology. See Mark F. Grady & Jay I. Alexander, Patent Law and Rent Dissipation, 78 VA. L. REV. 305 (1992) (refining Kitch's approach using insights from political economy theory).


Nonetheless, the utilitarian framework serves as the central framework for most patent scholarship. This reflects the utilitarian character of the U.S. Constitution's Intellectual Property Clause as well as the importance of promoting technological innovation for every nation that seeks to meet the needs of its citizens and to defend its sovereignty. It also reflects the patent system's market setting and the broad nature of the patent grant. Patents give the inventor the right to sue not only those who copy their invention, but those who reverse engineer it and even those who develop the same invention independently. The broad nature of this grant makes it difficult to speak of a "moral entitlement" to a patent. And in part the focus on utilitarian theory mirrors the subject matter of patents, which revolves around mechanical devices, chemical formulae, and the like. The "personality" invested in stamping machinery or pesticides is less obvious than in artistic works.

Although the economic incentive story is straightforward, it does not tell us very much about how to design a patent system to provide optimal incentives. For the reasons described in Chapter I, both overprotecting and underprotecting technology can impede innovation. Thus designing the proper economic incentive requires policymakers to balance the length of the patent term, the appropriate standard of invention, and the nature of the rights granted. Resolving these conflicts has occupied courts and legislators since the passage of the first patent statute in 1790 . We will reexamine these issues at the end of the chapter.
