
The archetypal general partnership is an at-will relationship. If the association becomes unwanted by any partner, then that partner may dissolve the relationship at will. Moreover, in most circumstances, after dissolution of an at-will partnership, any former partner may force a liquidating sale of the business. Are there, or should there be, any fiduciary limits on this right to cause dissolution and liquidation of an at-will partnership?

## Page v. Page <br> Supreme Court of California, 1961 <br> 359 P.2d 41

Traynor, Justice.
Plaintiff and defendant are partners in a linen supply business in Santa Maria, California. Plaintiff appeals from a judgment declaring the partnership to be for a term rather than at will.

The partners entered into an oral partnership agreement in 1949. Within the first two years each partner contributed approximately $43,000 for the purchase of land, machinery, and linen needed to begin the business. From 1949 to 1957 the enterprise was unprofitable, losing approximately $62,000. The partnership's major creditor is a corporation, wholly owned by plaintiff, that supplies the linen and machinery necessary for the day-to-day operation of the business. This corporation holds a $47,000 demand note of the partnership. The partnership operations began to improve in 1958. The partnership earned $3,824.41 in that year and $2,282.30 in the first three months of 1959. Despite this improvement plaintiff wishes to terminate the partnership.

The Uniform Partnership Act provides that a partnership may be dissolved "[b]y the express will of any partner when no definite term or particular undertaking is specified." The trial court found that the partnership is for a term, namely, "such reasonable time as is necessary to enable said partnership to repay from partnership profits, indebtedness incurred for the purchase of land, buildings, laundry and delivery equipment and linen for the operation of such business. . . ." Plaintiff correctly contends that this finding is without support in the evidence.

Defendant testified that the terms of the partnership were to be similar to former partnerships of plaintiff and defendant, and that the understanding of these partnerships was that "we went into partnership to start the business and let the business operation pay for itself, — put in so much money, and let the business pay itself out." There was also testimony that one of the former partnership agreements provided in writing that the profits were to be retained until all obligations were paid.

Upon cross-examination defendant admitted that the former partnership in which the earnings were to be retained until the obligations were repaid was substantially different from the present partnership. The former partnership was a limited partnership and provided for a definite term of five years and a partnership at will thereafter. Defendant insists, however, that the method of operation of the former partnership showed an understanding that all obligations were to be repaid from profits. He nevertheless concedes that there was no understanding as to the term of the present partnership in the event of losses. He was asked: "(W)as there any discussion with reference to the continuation of the business in the event of losses?" He replied, "Not that I can remember." He was then asked, "Did you have any understanding with Mr. Page, your brother, the plaintiff in this action, as to how the obligations were to be paid if there were losses?" He replied, "Not that I can remember. I can't remember discussing that at all. We never figured on losing, I guess."

Viewing this evidence most favorably for defendant, it proves only that the partners expected to meet current expenses from current income and to recoup their investment if the business were successful.

Defendant contends that such an expectation is sufficient to create a partnership for a term under the rule of Owen v. Cohen, 19 Cal. 2d 147, 150, 119 P.2d 713. In that case we held that when a partner advances a sum of money to a partnership with the understanding that the amount contributed was to be a loan to the partnership and was to be repaid as soon as feasible from the prospective profits of the business, the partnership is for the term reasonably required to repay the loan. It is true that Owen v. Cohen, supra, and other cases hold that partners may impliedly agree to continue in business until a certain sum of money is earned, or one or more partners recoup their investments, or until certain debts are paid, or until certain property could be disposed of on favorable terms. In each of these cases, however, the implied agreement found support in the evidence.

In Owen v. Cohen, supra, the partners borrowed substantial amounts of money to launch the enterprise and there was an understanding that the loans would be repaid from partnership profits. In Vangel v. Vangel [116 Cal. App. 2d 615, 254 P.2d 919], one partner loaned his co-partner money to invest in the partnership with the understanding that the money would be repaid from partnership profits. In Mervyn Investment Co. v. Biber [184 Cal. 637, 194 P. 1037], one partner contributed all the capital, the other contributed his services, and it was understood that upon the repayment of the contributed capital from partnership profits the partner who contributed his services would receive a one-third interest in the partnership assets. In each of these cases the court properly held that the partners impliedly promised to continue the partnership for a term reasonably required to allow the partnership to earn sufficient money to accomplish the understood objective. In Shannon v. Hudson [161 Cal. App. 2d 44, 325 P.2d 1022], the parties entered into a joint venture to build and operate a motel until it could be sold upon favorable and mutually satisfactory terms, and the court held that the joint venture was for a reasonable term sufficient to accomplish the purpose of the joint venture.
In the instant case, however, defendant failed to prove any facts from which an agreement to continue the partnership for a term may be implied. The understanding to which defendant testified was no more than a common hope that the partnership earnings would pay for all the necessary expenses. Such a hope does not establish even by implication a "definite term or particular undertaking" as required by [UPA §31(1)(b)]. All partnerships are ordinarily entered into with the hope that they will be profitable, but that alone does not make them all partnerships for a term and obligate the partners to continue in the partnerships until all of the losses over a period of many years have been recovered.

Defendant contends that plaintiff is acting in bad faith and is attempting to use his superior financial position to appropriate the now profitable business of the partnership. Defendant has invested $43,000 in the firm, and owing to the long period of losses his interest in the partnership assets is very small. The fact that plaintiff's wholly-owned corporation holds a $47,000 demand note of the partnership may make it difficult to sell the business as a going concern. Defendant fears that upon dissolution he will receive very little and that plaintiff, who is the managing partner and knows how to conduct the operations of the partnership, will receive a business that has become very profitable because of the establishment of Vandenberg Air Force Base in its vicinity. Defendant charges that plaintiff has been content to share the losses but now that the business has become profitable he wishes to keep all the gains.

There is no showing in the record of bad faith or that the improved profit situation is more than temporary. In any event these contentions are irrelevant to the issue whether the partnership is for a term or at will. Since, however, this action is for a declaratory judgment and will be the basis for future action by the parties, it is appropriate to point out that defendant is amply protected by the fiduciary duties of co-partners.

Even though the Uniform Partnership Act provides that a partnership at will may be dissolved by the express will of any partner, this power, like any other power held by a fiduciary, must be exercised in good faith.

We have often stated that "partners are trustees for each other, and in all proceedings connected with the conduct of the partnership every partner is bound to act in the highest good faith to his copartner, and may not obtain any advantage over him in the partnership affairs by the slightest misrepresentation, concealment, threat, or adverse pressure of any kind." . . .

A partner at will is not bound to remain in a partnership, regardless of whether the business is profitable or unprofitable. A partner may not, however, by use of adverse pressure "freeze out" a co-partner and appropriate the business to his own use. A partner may not dissolve a partnership to gain the benefits of the business for himself, unless he fully compensates his co-partner for his share of the prospective business opportunity. In this regard his fiduciary duties are at least as great as those of a shareholder of a corporation.

In the case of In re Security Finance Co., 49 Cal. 2d 370, 376-377, 317 P.2d 1, 5, we stated that although shareholders representing 50 percent of the voting power have a right . . . to dissolve a corporation, they may not exercise such right in order "to defraud the other shareholders, to "freeze out" minority shareholders, or to sell the assets of the dissolved corporation at an inadequate price."
Likewise in the instant case, plaintiff has the power to dissolve the partnership by express notice to defendant. If, however, it is proved that plaintiff acted in bad faith and violated his fiduciary duties by attempting to appropriate to his own use the new prosperity of the partnership without adequate compensation to his co-partner, the dissolution would be wrongful and the plaintiff would be liable as provided by [UPA §38(2)(a)]. . . for violation of the implied agreement not to exclude defendant wrongfully from the partnership business opportunity.

The judgment is reversed. . . .

# NOTES AND QUESTIONS 

1. Does Page v. Page strike a proper balance between two conflicting goals protecting a partner's ability to adapt to changed circumstances and deterring opportunistic withdrawal or threats of withdrawal?
2. Page v. Page has been criticized. The views of Professor Hillman summarize the concerns.

The weaker partner in Page could have bargained for a definite term, but he did not. Fairness under such circumstances does not require the stronger partner to carry the weaker partner indefinitely.

Robert W. Hillman, The Dissatisfied Participant in the Solvent Business Venture: A Consideration of the Relative Permanence of Partnerships and Close Corporations, 67 Minn. L. Rev. 1, 33 (1982).

Professor O'Kelley suggests that the line drawn should not be so bright.
Some commentators assert that Page unduly restricts the adaptability of majority partners. These commentators argue that if the parties had wished to fetter the majority partner's withdrawal rights, they would have specified a durational term. This view overlooks the longstanding role of fiduciary duty in partnership law and the significance of the parties' selection of partnership form instead of sole proprietorship form. Assuming rational actors, selection of general partnership form instead of sole proprietorship form signals to an efficiency-minded judge that the parties desired that more stringent judicial constraints be placed on the majority partner's adaptability than would be the case if the majority partner were the firm's sole proprietor. Consistent with this expectation, Page recognizes that majority partners have substantially less adaptability than do sole proprietors.

Charles R. O'Kelley, Filling Gaps in the Close Corporation Contract: A Transaction Cost Analysis, 87 Nw. U. L. Rev. 216, 237 (1992).
3. Cude v. Couch, 588 S.W.2d 554 (Tenn. 1979), presents a fact pattern similar to Page v. Page. Couch and Cude formed a partnership to operate a laundromat. The partnership leased its premises from Couch on a month-to-month basis. Couch obtained a judicial dissolution of the partnership, and the partnership's assets were subsequently auctioned at a public sale. At the time of sale Couch announced that he would not lease the premises to anyone wishing to operate a laundromat on the premises. As a result, the partnership's assets were worth more to Couch, who could leave them in place, than to any other buyer, and Couch, through an undisclosed agent, was the successful bidder. Cude moved to set aside the sale on the grounds that Couch's actions breached his fiduciary duty. The court by majority opinion refused to grant relief:

From the beginning of the partnership, Couch made it clear that he would not permit a lease of the property, in part to insure that the operation of the laundromat would not interfere with that of his car dealership, operating in the same building. . . . Unquestionably, Couch had an advantage, divorced from the partnership, that made it more practicable for him to carry on the business of the partnership after dissolution than for others. However, the fact that Couch benefitted from that circumstance harmed neither Cude nor the partnership, and breached his duty to neither.

588 S.W.2d at 556 .

# PROBLEM 2-10 

Harv Hansen, Stan Simpson, and Bill Brock have been equal partners for two years. Their partnership owns and operates a specialty sporting goods store, under the name World Cup Soccer Shop. Harv and Stan provide day-to-day management services, but no capital, to the partnership. Bill, a prominent physician, provides capital, but no services, to the partnership. The partners' original goal was to develop a national chain of soccer shops, but so far they have been unable to attract franchisees. The partnership broke even each of its first two years.

Bill Brock believes that as the next World Cup approaches, the partnership will realize its franchising goal and become extremely profitable. Bill recently approached Stan and suggested that the existing partnership be terminated and a new one formed, excluding Harv. Stan is agreeable.

Bill has retained your services in connection with the above plan of action. How would you advise him to proceed? What questions would you ask before giving your advice?
