
UPA (1997) § 409(b)

Vigneau v. Storch Engineers<br>Superior Court of Connecticut, 1995<br>1995 WL 767984

Before Sullivan, Dorsey and Walsh, JJ.

## Memorandum of Decision . . .

Plaintiff sues to recover the value of his partnership interest pursuant to the retirement provisions of a partnership agreement. Defendant defends and counterclaims on the grounds of plaintiff's breach of fiduciary duty, breach of contract, fraud, violation of Connecticut Unfair Trade Practices Act (CUTPA), and negligence. . . . The primary issue presented is the consequences flowing from plaintiff violating the fiduciary duty owed to the defendant partnership by his self-dealing.

The facts are as follows:
Defendant Storch Engineers (sometimes hereinafter Storch) is a consulting engineering firm, operating as a partnership, with its principal place of business in New Jersey and offices also in Connecticut and other northeastern states. Plaintiff was hired by defendant as an architect for its Hartford office in 1980 and became a partner in 1983 when he acquired one partnership point or a one percent interest in the partnership. Plaintiff funded additional partnership points by executing promissory notes in favor of Herbert Storch, the managing partner, and the partnership. Eventually, he accumulated 3.071 points of ownership in the partnership. . . .

Plaintiff functioned as the sole architect in the defendant's Hartford office. In the period from 1983, when plaintiff became a partner, until 1987, when plaintiff resigned, defendant's net billings in Connecticut increased from $884,523 to $2,014,661.

The partnership agreement between plaintiff and Storch (hereinafter the Agreement) provides at paragraph 13 that each partner shall (c) diligently attend to the business of the partnership and devote his whole time and attention thereto unless otherwise determined and authorized by the Managing Partner.
(d) be just and faithful to the other partners and at all times give to the other partners full information and truthful explanations of all matters relating to the affairs of the partnership and afford every assistance in his power to carry on the business for the mutual advantage of his partners.

In 1983, Joseph Merluzzo, head of defendant's Connecticut operations, recruited plaintiff to invest with him in a real estate development partnership known as Highview Condominium Associates (hereinafter HCA) to build condominiums in Cromwell. Merluzzo became the managing partner of HCA and plaintiff a general partner with a 22% interest. The arrangement was kept secret from Storch. HCA hired Storch to do the architectural and engineering work for its project and plaintiff was Storch's architect-in-charge. Plaintiff appeared before a Cromwell zoning and planning board to seek approval of the plans for the project.

The fees for Storch's services to HCA were negotiated by Merluzzo and plaintiff acting in dual roles as secret partners of HCA and as representative of Storch. Although a witness for Storch testified the fees of $34,000 charged for Storch's services were low by $19,000, the court believes plaintiff's testimony that those fees were reasonable and in accordance with market rates.

Plaintiff made a profit in 1984 from his interest in HCA of $28,059, which he never revealed or accounted for to his partners at Storch.

In June 1984 Merluzzo initiated another real estate partnership, called Grandford Associates, to build an office building in Hartford. Plaintiff became a general partner in that partnership with an 8.33% share.

Merluzzo and plaintiff posted a job announcement with Storch Engineers that Storch would do the architectural and engineering work on the Grandford project. The announcement was designed to conceal Merluzzo's and plaintiff's interest in Grandford.

Merluzzo and plaintiff negotiated secretly with themselves to establish the fees Storch was to charge Grandford for Storch's services. Although defendant's witness testified those fees were low by $120,000, the court believed plaintiff's testimony that those fees were reasonable and in accordance with market rates.

Grandford suffered reverses and was unable to pay Storch's bills totalling $114,000. Plaintiff participated in decisions of Grandford to pay other creditors rather than Storch. Grandford's debt caused considerable concern to Storch. Merluzzo and plaintiff falsely assured Storch the bill would be paid by Grandford's "professional" partners obtaining bank financing.

In January 1986 plaintiff, in his capacity as Storch's architect-in-charge, wrote to Grandford formally requesting payment of Storch's long-overdue bill. This was a calculated deception by which plaintiff was concealing his Grandford involvement, in effect dunning himself and giving the illusion of an arm's-length transaction between Storch and Grandford. Eventually, Grandford was taken over by another firm and in October 1986 the Storch bill was fully paid with interest.

Plaintiff lost $22,000 on the Grandford deal.
Merluzzo resigned from Storch in July 1986 when his participation in Grandford was discovered by Storch. At that time he told Storch that plaintiff's involvement in Grandford was "minimal." Plaintiff promised Storch to divest himself of his entire interest in Grandford. He attempted to do so but could find no takers. Storch demanded plaintiff produce the Grandford partnership agreement. Not until February 1989 did plaintiff do so and also reveal his role in HCA. Only then did Storch get the full and true picture of plaintiff's self-dealing in those two projects.

The Agreement provides at paragraph 22 that the partnership "shall purchase for the price and in the manner hereinafter set forth, the interest of (a) any partner desiring to sell his interest, or (b) any . . . retired partner. . . ."

Plaintiff resigned from Storch by letter dated May 1, 1987, effective as of June 30, 1987. The reasons for the resignation was poor health and dissatisfaction with the direction of the partnership. . . . Plaintiff duly demanded that his partnership interest be purchased and paid for by the partnership pursuant to the Agreement. Storch has refused to do so. . . . The parties have stipulated that the plaintiff's 3.071% partnership interest had a value at the time of his resignation of $167,794.50. . . . The defendant, while conceding the value of plaintiff's partnership interest, argues that it is not obligated to pay it because plaintiff violated the partnership agreement and its fiduciary duty to the partnership. . . .
[Under the governing law, whether it be that of New Jersey or that of Connecticut] a partner bears a fiduciary relationship to his partners. Justice Benjamin Cardozo in Meinhard v. Salmon, 249 N.Y. 458, 464 (1928), equated partners with trustees and stated the oft-quoted words: "A trustee is held to something stricter than the morals of the marketplace. Not honesty alone, but the punctilio of an honor the most sensitive, is then the standard of behavior." That standard is incorporated in Connecticut law, Konover Dev. Corp. v. Zeller, 228 Conn. 206, 218 n. 9 (1994), and in New Jersey law, Heller v. Hartz Mountain Industries, 636 A.2d 599, 603 (N.J. Super. App. 1993).

The one absolute taboo is that a fiduciary may not engage in self-dealing. As stated in Shepard, Law of Fiduciaries at 156-57 (1981), "[T]he basic rule is a strong prohibition against self-dealing. The idea is that the fiduciary should not be acting as both vendor and purchaser, whether for goods or services." See also Bromberg and Ribstein on Partnership §6.07 at 6:74. A partner is also obligated to his partners to render "true accounts and full information about everything which affects the partnership." Weidlich v. Weidlich, 147 Conn. 160, 164 (1960). The Agreement between this plaintiff and defendant specifically imposes that requirement at paragraph 13(d).

The facts of this case clearly establish that plaintiff violated his fiduciary duty to the defendant by self-dealing in the HCA and Grandford projects and by concealing from the defendant those activities. Plaintiff argues that defendant suffered no harm and in fact benefitted from those two projects because defendant realized substantial fees from them. The fact that defendant suffered no injury as a result of the plaintiff's disloyalty is of no consequence and acts as no excuse. As stated in Bromberg and Ribstein on Partnership, §6.07 at 6:94, the rule is "prophylactic in nature, based on the need not only to compensate but to deter conduct that poses a risk of damage to the partnership."

In Cogan v. Kidder, Matthew \& Senger, Inc., 648 P.2d 875, 878 (Wash. 1982), the court held that when an agent has dual responsibilities and serves interests adverse to the principal, it is of no consequence that his disloyalty did not injure the principal. "Not only does harm not define the scope of fiduciary duty, it also is not determinative of damages." Id. at 886. It further stated that strong public policy reasons justify the rule: "If damages were measured solely by the loss to the principal, often there would be little disincentive to the agent for assuming conflicting responsibilities without disclosure." Id.

The real issue here is whether plaintiff's violation of his fiduciary duty deprives him of his right to be paid for his vested partnership interest. . . . While neither Connecticut nor New Jersey have cases on the point, other jurisdictions have clearly held that a disloyal partner is entitled to reimbursement for his vested interest or capital contributions.

In Meehan v. Shaughnessy, 535 N.E.2d 1255 (Mass. 1989), where law partners were found to have breached their fiduciary duty to their firm, the firm argued they thereby forfeited all rights to their capital contributions. The court expressly rejected that contention, holding the disloyal partners were entitled to their interest in the partnership's reserve and capital accounts and in the partnership income earned but not distributed. The court said capital contributions "are not a form of liquidated damages to which partners can resort in the event of breach." Id. at 1266. . . . Thus, this court holds that, despite plaintiff's breach of fiduciary duty owed to Storch, he is entitled to the value of his vested partnership interest, stipulated to amount to $167,794.50. . .

As to defendant's counterclaim of breach of fiduciary duty, the court recognizes the rule that once a fiduciary relationship is established, as is the fact here, the burden of proof of fair dealing shifts to the plaintiff and he must meet that burden by clear and convincing evidence. Konover Dev. Corp. v. Zeller, 228 Conn. 206, 229-30 (1994). Clearly plaintiff has failed to do so, and the court finds that plaintiff's hidden participation in the Grandford and HCA projects constituted a violation of the fiduciary obligations he owed Storch.

One consequence of such a violation is Storch is entitled to recover from plaintiff the secret profit of $28,059 plaintiff realized on the HCA deal. As stated in Bromberg and Ribstein on Partnership, § 6.07, p. 6:93 (1994), "The measure of damages for fiduciary breach clearly includes any profits earned as a result of the breach." C.G.S. § 34-59(1) provides that the breaching partner holds unauthorized profits "as trustee."

Pursuant to §37-3 a this court awards interest at 10% per annum on the profit of $28,059 from 1984 to 1995 , amounting to interest of $30,864, for a total of $58,923. . . .

Storch claims damages for all compensation and profit-sharing paid to plaintiff during the period of disloyalty, amounting to $164,105. The Restatement of Agency, Second at §469 provides that "[a]n agent is entitled to no compensation for conduct... which is a breach of his duty of loyalty; if such conduct constitutes a willful and deliberate breach of his contract of service, he is not entitled to compensation even for properly performed services for which no compensation is apportioned." Hegman v. Kline, 344 F. Supp. 1110, 1114 (D. Conn. 1979), rev'd on other grounds, 456 F.2d 125 (2nd Cir. 1972), interpreted that section to mean, "when a disloyal employee is paid without [the principal's] knowledge of his disloyalty, he may be compelled to return what he has improperly received."

However, other courts have examined the reasoning behind the provisions of the Restatements of Agency and Trusts, and "find the basis for refusal of compensation to a trustee, not in the theory of a penalty, but in the theory that payment is not due for services not properly performed." Lydia E. Pinkhorn Medicine Co. v. Gove, 20 N.E.2d 482, 486 (1939). Thus, the rule that a failed fiduciary may be denied compensation or be required to return compensation paid is "not inflexible and generally rests with the discretion of the court." Williams v. Queen Fisheries, Inc., 469 P.2d 583, 585 (Wash. App. 1970); Cogan v. Kidder Matthews \& Signer, Inc., 648 P.2d 875, 890 (Wash. 1982); Willis v. Van Woy, 20 So. 2d 690 (Fla. 1945).

In the instant case, apart from his disloyal participation in the HCA and Grandford projects, plaintiff performed his architectural services for Storch competently and contributed substantially to the success of the firm over the period 1980 to 1987. Requiring him to repay his entire compensation would constitute undue enrichment to Storch and amount to an unjust penalty. This court exercises its discretion to deny such a result.

Storch would be entitled to the losses resulting from plaintiff negotiating Storch's fees for services to HCA and Grandford lower than the market, but this court finds those fees were reasonable and in line with market rates.
[Editors' note: The Court further determined that plaintiff's conduct constituted a breach of CUPTA, for which breach the Court imposed punitive damages in the amount of $50,000 and awarded defendant its reasonable attorney's fees in the amount of $110,000.]
