
Most activity within a firm is governed not by judicially enforceable contracts, but by norms - non-legally enforceable rules and standards (NLERS). Firms that have effective NLERS get more loyal and diligent performance from team members than firms that do not, and, therefore, are more likely to succeed than firms with less effective NLERS.

What are the NLERS? To some extent, this will depend on the individual firm. For example, the famous dress code of IBM in the 1960s requiring white shirts, ties, and dark suits was an IBMspecific NLERS. Most everyone did it, you were expected to do it, and you were sanctioned, either formally or informally, if you did not. Less trivially, the promotion of teamwork is an NLERS practiced in many firms. Other firms, however, may promote individual effort.

One useful way of thinking of NLERS is that they form a great part of what is sometimes referred to as the firm's "corporate culture." Corporate culture can serve a coordinating function, making it more likely that employees will do what they are supposed to do when they are supposed to do it. NLERS play the intrafirm coordinating role that contracts play in market activity. Those that live up to or outperform the contract or NLERS expectations are credited, while those who do not are penalized with a range of sanctions including demotion, suspension, or dismissal. A principal difference, however, between NLERS and contracts is that when the parties disagree as to whether performance has been satisfied, courts can impose penalties in the latter case, but only the parties can do so in the former. . . .

Within a firm, NLERS operate at many different levels. . . . For example, "discharge only for cause" in a world of employment-at-will is one of the prime NLERS that protects employees. Promotion from within to reward outstanding performance or seniority is another employment NLERS.

Other NLERS involve the manner in which the firm determines whether an investment project should be undertaken. The use of discounted present value for this purpose is an NLERS observed in many firms. . . .

NLERS also are not invariably efficient, socially beneficial, or conducive to the success of the firm. Some seem to help the firm succeed, like the NLERS of high-tech firms that lead engineers to work intensely on critical projects. Others may interfere with success, like the NLERS of not working too hard that emerges in some industrial work places. In historically regulated industries, all types of suboptimal, cost inefficient practices thrived and were protected and reinforced by the suppliers, unions, and others that benefited from them. These NLERS were sanctioned by the firms but were not socially efficient. For decades, racial, religious, and ethnic discrimination was an NLERS openly practiced by blue-chip firms. In some boardrooms, an NLERS is to accede to the wishes of the CEO regardless of her value to the firm. The decision by the board of Occidental Petroleum to build the Armand Hammer museum to house the CEO's unremarkable art collection was the result of such an NLERS. This type of NLERS is supportive of the executive officers but not the shareholders.

Edward B. Rock \& Michael L. Wachter, Islands of Conscious Power: Law, Norms, and the Self-Governing Corporation, 149 U. Pa. L. Rev. 1619, 1642-1643 (2001).
