
Economist R.H. Coase ^4 identified a "firm" as the antithesis of the market with respect to the means by which economic resources are allocated. In the idealized market economy, often identified with Adam Smith, each producer and consumer separately calculates her own self-interest and chooses what to make and what to buy based on price signals received in the market. As a result, resources are allocated to their highest and best use, not in response to governmental orders or other communicated commands, but as if by an invisible hand, through the separate, self-interested choices of all producers and consumers. By contrast, inside a firm resources are allocated pursuant to conscious orders or directions from the entrepreneur to her employees.

Return to our bakery hypothetical. Mary handles most of the baking, writes advertising copy, deals with customers, and so on. However, for certain parts of the production and sales process Mary uses the market. For example, Mary cannot efficiently produce the raw materials she uses. Instead, she buys eggs, flour, and butter from a supplier. Likewise, she purchases transport services from a trucking firm, accounting services from a local certified public accountant, and electricity from a utility company. But Mary does not rely solely on market transactions for the materials and services that she cannot self-produce. She also hires employees and directs them to perform the tasks-waiting on customers, keeping the premises clean, handling baking on weekends - that cannot be handled as efficiently via market transactions or by Mary herself.

From this Coasean perspective, the "firm" is what we call the set of relations that arise when the entrepreneur allocates resources via commands to her employees, rather than the set of relations that arise when an entrepreneur allocates resources via market transactions with outsiders. Thus, depicted as a circle and using Mary, the classical owner/entrepreneur, as an example, the Coasean firm includes Mary and her employees, but excludes the customers, suppliers, and creditors with whom Mary does business via contract or market exchanges.

From the Coasean perspective, the essence of the firm is the entrepreneur's management and conscious direction of resource allocation decisions. Thus, a firm is identified with an internal decision-making hierarchy. The entrepreneur is the responsible owner/manager who sits at the top of the hierarchy. All decisional authority resides in the entrepreneur, and is either exercised by the entrepreneur or delegated to employees to exercise. Decisions within the firm are made, not in response to price signals, but via conscious direction and command. Each employee surrenders the autonomy they would possess as a sole proprietor and agrees, instead, to follow the commands and directions of the entrepreneur.


[^0]: 4. See Ronald H. Coase, The Nature of the Firm, 4 Economica 386-405 (1937).