
Restatement (Third) of Agency §§8.01,8.02,8.03,8.04,8.05,8.06<br>Restatement of Employment Law §§2.01,8.01,8.02,8.03,8.04,8.05, 8.09,8.10,8.11

Organizing team production via market exchange between autonomous persons maximizes the ability of individual team members to adapt to changed circumstances. However, team members will have minimal incentive to make team-specific investments. For example, suppose that Sharon and Jake organize a brewery venture as an implicit team-Sharon owns and operates a beer distributorship, and Jake owns and operates a brewery. Initially, Jake sells all of his product to Sharon, and Sharon develops a network of dealers to whom she sells Jake's beer. After the distributor network is well established, Jake may be tempted to deal directly with Sharon's customers, thereby appropriating the profit attributable to Sharon's sales efforts. Because there is no contractual relationship between Sharon and Jake, Sharon may have no legal remedy. Consequently, Sharon will be unlikely to develop the distributorship in the first place without obtaining contractual protection for her investment.

Suppose, instead, that the brewery venture is organized as a firm, with Sharon serving as owner and Jake as an employee. Under the common law of agency, Jake now owes a fiduciary duty to Sharon. He must deal with her in total candor, must account to her for all profits flowing from information he receives in her service, must not use or disclose Sharon's trade secrets, and may not carry on a competing business until after the agency relationship is terminated. In short, Jake, as an agent, is required to prefer Sharon's, his principal's, interests to his own.

Fiduciary duty can be viewed as a judicially enforceable contractual device supplied to Sharon and Jake by the state. As such, fiduciary duty substitutes for an express contractual specification of exactly what an agent may or may not do. A rational person in Jake's shoes might wish to assume a fiduciary duty in order to convince Sharon that he will not act opportunistically during the course of the venture and thereby induce Sharon to make a needed investment. Thus, we might say that in agreeing to become Sharon's agent, Jake has impliedly acquiesced to the restrictions imposed by fiduciary duty. If Jake does act opportunistically, he runs the risk that a court will find that he has violated his fiduciary duty.

The following case illustrates the importance of fiduciary duty and its interpretation for the efficient and fair functioning of our highly entrepreneurial and innovative society. Consider what either party or their advisors could have done (without sacrificing their legitimate selfish interests) that might have made this litigation unnecessary.
# Taser International, Inc. v. Ward <br> Court of Appeals of Arizona, 2010 <br> 231 P.3d 921 

Portley, Judge.
Defendant Steve Ward appeals from the entry of partial summary judgment in favor of Plaintiff Taser International. He argues that partial summary judgment should be entered in his favor, or, alternatively, that issues of material fact preclude summary judgment in favor of Taser. For the following reasons, we reverse the entry of partial summary judgment, direct entry of summary judgment in part in favor of Ward, and remand for further proceedings.

## Facts and Procedural History

Taser International develops and manufactures electronic control devices, commonly called stun guns, and accessories for electronic control devices, including a personal video and audio recording device called TASER CAM. Taser sells its products to the military, law enforcement, corrections, private security, and the general public.

Ward was employed full-time with Taser from January 1, 2004, to July 24, 2007, and served as Taser's vice-president of marketing during the time relevant to this appeal. ^1 He was an at-will employee, and he did not sign any employment contract, non-compete agreement, or non-disclosure agreement.

During his employment, Ward was privy to some of Taser's confidential information, trade secrets, and other intellectual property. As a member of Taser's Vital Factors Team he participated with company executives and other vice-presidents in considering new product ideas and concepts, product failure rates, product strategies, operational issues, and marketing programs.

In December 2006, Ward began exploring whether he could personally develop the concept of an eyeglass-mounted camera. He sought legal advice about whether he could permissibly develop such a camera independent of Taser, and hired patent counsel to conduct a patent search on the idea.

Between April 2007, and his resignation approximately four months later, Ward shifted his exploration to the concept of a clip-on camera device after learning that the eyeglass-mounted concept was already patent protected. He directed patent counsel to conduct a patent search on the modified idea. He communicated with JAMProactive, a product development company, about the design and development of a clip-on camera device, ^3 and he received a detailed product development proposal from JAM-Proactive on June 12, 2007. Prior to his resignation, Ward planned to leave 2. It is unclear . . . whether Ward . . . retained the services of JAM-Proactive before, or after, he resigned from Taser.
Taser to form a new business, and completed substantial work on a business plan to develop, market, and sell a clip-on camera device. ^4

Ward resigned on July 24, 2007. He never disclosed to Taser his future business plans or his intentions to continue working on the clip-on camera device. He formed Vievu LLC on August 23, 2007, and Vievu now markets a clip-on camera device to general consumers and law enforcement. Ten months after Ward resigned, Taser announced the AXON, a product that provides an audio-video record of an incident from the visual perspective of the person involved.

Taser filed suit against Ward on October 22, 2007, and asserted claims for misappropriation of trade secrets, breach of the duty of loyalty, tortious interference with contract, breach of contract, breach of fiduciary duty, conversion, and unjust enrichment. The breach of the duty of loyalty and fiduciary duty claims were based on allegations that, while employed with Taser, Ward was "working on [a] Personal Video and Audio Recording Product for [his] own account and with a view toward exploiting this work for [his] own personal gain in competition with TASER." Taser also alleged that Ward "diverted and misdirected certain aspects of new product development of TASER . . . with intent to compete with TASER and to obtain an improper competitive advantage against TASER at such time as he left TASER's employment." ^6 Ward answered and asserted counterclaims for tortious interference with contractual relations, tortious interference with business expectancy, and abuse of process.

Taser moved for partial summary judgment on the liability aspect of the breach of the duty of loyalty and fiduciary duty claims. Ward responded with a cross-motion on those claims. After oral argument, the trial court concluded that "there [was] no genuine issue of material fact . . . , that Defendant Ward owed a duty of loyalty to Taser and had a fiduciary duty to Taser[,] and that he breached and violated [those] duties." Consequently, the court granted Taser's motion and denied Ward's crossmotion. . . .

# Discussion 

Ward argues that the trial court erred by granting Taser summary judgment on the liability aspect of the breach of the duty of loyalty and fiduciary duty claims. He contends that summary judgment should have been entered in his favor. . . .

In its motion, Taser raised the following theories to support its claims: (1) Ward engaged in direct competition with Taser prior to his resignation; (2) he improperly used Taser's materials and confidential information; (3) he usurped Taser's corporate opportunity in a "second generation on-officer audio and video recording device 5. During oral argument in the trial court, Taser conceded that the duty of loyalty and fiduciary duty claims "overlap." Each claim is predicated on nearly identical allegations, and Taser makes no attempt to differentiate the claims or explain whether its legal theories fall under one or both claims.
building from the TASER CAM"; and (4) he failed to inform Taser that he planned to form a competing business. Because the trial court simply granted judgment to Taser on its duty of loyalty and fiduciary duty claims, we review each of the legal theories de novo. . . .

# A. DUTY NOT TO COMPETE 

"[I]n Arizona, an employee/agent owes his or her employer/principal a fiduciary duty." McCallister Co. v. Kastella, 170 Ariz. 455, 457, 825 P.2d 980, 982 (App.1992). "[I]t is too plain to need discussion that an agent is under the duty to act with entire good faith and loyalty for the furtherance of the interests of his principal in all matters concerning or affecting the subject of his agency, and if he fails to do so[,] he is responsible to his principal for any loss resulting therefrom." Thomas v. Newcomb, 26 Ariz. 47, 51, 221 P. 226, 228 (1923). ^9

One aspect of this broad principle is that an employee is precluded from actively competing with his or her employer during the period of employment. Restatement (Third) of Agency §8.04 (2006) ("Throughout the duration of an agency relationship, an agent has a duty to refrain from competing with the principal. . . ."). Following the termination of the employment relationship, however, in the absence of an enforceable non-compete agreement, a former employee is free to compete. Restatement (Third) of Agency §8.04cmt. b, c.

Although an employee may not compete prior to termination, "[the employee] may take action [during employment], not otherwise wrongful, to prepare for competition following termination of the agency relationship." Restatement (Third) of Agency § 8.04. Preparation cannot take the form of "acts in direct competition with the employer's business."
"The line separating mere preparation from active competition may be difficult to discern in some cases," and we must "focus on the nature of the defendant's preparations to compete." Restatement (Third) of Agency §8.04cmt. c ("In retrospect it may prove difficult to assess the propriety of a former agent's conduct because many actions may be proper or improper, depending on . . . the surrounding circumstances. For that reason it may be difficult to draw a clean distinction between actions prior to termination of an agency relationship that constitute mere preparation for competition, which do not contravene an employee's or other agent's duty to the principal, and actions that constitute competition."). "[T]he ultimate determination of whether an employee has breached his fiduciary duties to his employer by preparing to engage in a competing enterprise must be grounded upon a thoroughgoing examination of the facts and circumstances of the particular case." Maryland Metals, Inc. v. Metzner, 282 Md. 31, 382 A.2d 564, 570 (1978).

Here, it is undisputed that Ward was not bound by any employment contract or covenant not to compete with Taser. Thus, Ward was free to make reasonable preparations to compete while still employed, and to actively compete after his resignation. We review, however, whether Ward's actions were more than mere preparations or constituted unfair competition.

It is undisputed that, prior to his resignation, Ward did not solicit or recruit any Taser employees, distributors, customers, or vendors; he did not buy, sell, or incorporate any business; he did not acquire office space or other general business services; he did not contact or enter into any agreements with suppliers or manufacturers for his proposed clip-on camera; and he did not sell any products. However, Ward did begin developing a business plan, counseled with several attorneys, explored and abandoned the concept of an eyeglass-mounted camera device, and engaged, to some extent, in the exploration and development of a clip-on camera device. ^11

Ward argues that his pre-termination activities did not constitute active competition, but were merely lawful preparation for a future business venture. Taser contends, however, that " [t] his case is not about just investigating computer software, acquiring a line of credit, securing office space, or getting prices on telephones[,] . . . [but] about developing a rival design during employment, knowing full well TASER has sold such a device and continues to develop a second generation product."

Upon review, we agree with Ward that certain of his pre-termination activities are qualitatively different than "direct competition" and cannot form the basis for liability. Ward's partial development of a business plan did not compete with any of Taser's business activities, no matter the level of included detail. A business plan, by its very nature, is only a plan, and without implementation, cannot independently constitute disloyal competition. Similarly, Ward's interactions with attorneys for purposes of obtaining legal advice and to research existing patents do not constitute direct competition with Taser. See Fitness Experience, Inc. v. TFC Fitness Equip., Inc., 355 F.Supp.2d 877, 893 (N.D.Ohio 2004) (granting summary judgment against a breach of fiduciary duty claim where the defendants met with lawyers to plan a competing business because the activities constituted preparation to compete, not active competition). On the record before us, Ward's contact with attorneys was manifestly done to investigate his ability to design and possibly develop a camera device and did not constitute competition with Taser. Moreover, Taser did not present any evidence that Ward took steps during his employment to procure any intellectual property rights adverse to Taser or its interests.

Similarly, under the circumstances of this case, any preliminary research and development efforts aimed at assessing the possibility of developing a camera device did not constitute direct competition with Taser. There is no evidence that Ward's activities with the eyeglass-mounted camera concept went beyond preliminary investigation. Consequently, Ward's preliminary research into the eyeglass-mounted camera concept, which he later abandoned, cannot constitute a breach of his duty of loyalty. Additionally, any preliminary research conducted by Ward into the development of the clip-on camera device, including seeking a product design proposal, was distinctly preparatory and not direct competition with Taser. See Maryland Metals, 382 A.2d at 571 (holding that two employees' conduct was "manifestly preparatory in nature" where they "contacted and consulted with various municipal agencies, utility companies, construction contractors, manufacturers and engineers concerning [a future business] and the purchase of equipment necessary to operate and maintain the . . . business").

However, assuming Taser was engaged in the research and development of a recording device during Ward's employment, assuming Ward knew or should have known of those efforts, see W. Med. Consultants, Inc. v.Johnson, 80 F.3d 1331, 1335-37 (9th Cir.1996) (interpreting a noncompetition clause to be violated if a former employee "knew or should have known" of a former employer's business intentions and competed with those plans), and assuming Taser's device would compete with Ward's concept, ^13 substantial design and development efforts by Ward during his employment would constitute direct competition with the business activities of Taser and would violate his duty of loyalty. In the context of a business which engages in research, design, development, manufacture, and marketing of products, we cannot limit "competition" to just actual sales of competing products.

Summary judgment on this theory is nevertheless improper because a genuine issue of material fact exists as to the extent of Ward's pre-termination design and development efforts. In support of the conclusion that Ward actively competed prior to his resignation, Taser submitted evidence which indicated that he engaged in pre-termination communications with staff at JAM-Proactive and received its design proposal before his resignation. Taser also provides a version of Ward's business plan, completed after his resignation in July 2007, and an August 2007 Vievu company valuation. In the business plan, Ward states that "VieVU is in Phase 3 of the design of their camera system" and that it is "utilizing JAM-Proactive, a proven design company for electronics, to design the camera." In the Vievu company valuation, Ward stated that, " [t] he VieVU camera is well into development design stage 4 (out of 6)."

Based upon the evidence, a reasonable jury could infer that "Phase 3" and "stage 4" represent substantial design and development efforts, and that these efforts occurred during Ward's employment. However, a reasonable jury could also conclude that Ward's statements were mere puffery and that he had only explored options with JAM-Proactive and did not engage in substantial development efforts until after his resignation. . . .

# B. USE OF TASER RESOURCES AND CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION 

Although an employee may, absent a non-compete covenant, compete with a former employer or prepare to compete with a current employer, "the tactics that an agent may use . . . are subject to legal limits." Restatement (Third) of Agency § 8.04 cmt. b. Specifically, "[a]n agent has a duty (1) not to use property of the principal for the agent's own purposes . . . ; and (2) not to use or communicate confidential information of the principal for the agent's own purposes or those of a third party." Restatement (Third) of Agency § 8.05.

Taser argues that Ward both performed his pretermination camera-development efforts on company time and with company resources, and used proprietary information in developing his clip-on camera device and business.

## 1. Improper Use of Taser Resources

We find no evidence in the record demonstrating that Ward used Taser's time, facilities, or resources in his pre-termination camera-development efforts. In its statements of fact, Taser stated that "Ward used his laptop in developing [his] company." To support its statement, Taser cited to a portion of the deposition of Amy Pich, Ward's girlfriend. That portion, however, was not provided to the court, and our review of the evidence discloses no alternative support for the statement. Therefore, even if "his laptop" referred to Taser property, the proffered evidence is insufficient to establish that Ward used Taser resources.

Similarly, Taser attempted to demonstrate that Ward corresponded with several attorneys about his camera-development efforts while on company time by producing a privilege log showing the dates on which numerous emails were sent between Ward and his attorneys between December 2006 and August 2007. Even assuming that the correspondence was related to Ward's pretermination camera-development efforts, and assuming the privilege  is admissible evidence, the exhibit does not indicate the precise times at which Ward sent his email correspondence. Although the evidence indicated that Ward corresponded with various attorneys prior to his resignation, it does not establish that Ward did so on company time. Therefore, summary judgment in favor of Taser on this theory is inappropriate. ^15 Similarly, because we reverse based on questions of fact, we decline to direct judgment in favor of Ward on this theory.

## 2. Improper Use of Confidential Information

"An agent's relationship with a principal may result in the agent learning information . . . that the agent should reasonably understand the principal expects the agent to keep confidential." Restatement (Third) of Agency §8.05cmt. . The duty of confidentiality "extends to all such information concerning a principal even when it is not otherwise connected with the subject matter of the agency relationship," and "do[es] not end when the agency relationship terminates." Id. However, "[a] former agent may use skills and more general knowledge, although learned in the course of work done for the former principal," in the course of competition. Restatement (Third) of Agency §8.04cmt. c; see also Amex Distrib. Co. v. Mascari, 150 Ariz. 510, 516, 724 P.2d 596, 602 (App.1986) ("One who has worked in a particular field cannot be compelled to erase from his mind all of the general skills, knowledge and expertise acquired through his experience.").

Although it is undisputed that Ward was exposed to certain trade secrets and other confidential information, and retained notes taken during Taser strategy sessions, there is a genuine issue of material fact whether he used any such information in the development of his product or operation of his business. In his declaration, Ward states that, "[he is] unaware of any information or technology exclusive to TASER that can be found in VIEVU products." He also testified that "VIEVU's product is comprised of readily available off-the-shelf internal components . . . as well as custom-designed software and casing, all of which are unassociated with and wholly dissimilar to TASER's products." Taser would have us infer that Ward must have used its proprietary information in his business and design efforts. Taser, however, provides no evidence of the specific confidential information it contends was used by Ward, as opposed to information to which Ward was simply exposed. ^18

Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to Ward, and drawing all reasonable inferences in his favor, a reasonable jury could find that Ward did not use any proprietary information belonging to Taser in the development of his clip-on camera device or the operation of his business. ^19 Therefore, summary judgment on this theory was not appropriate. Because genuine issues of material fact exist, we decline to direct entry of summary judgment in favor of Ward. . . .

# D. DISCLOSURE OF INTENT TO COMPETE 

In its motion for summary judgment, Taser argued that Ward violated his fiduciary duties by failing to inform Taser that he "planned to form a competing business." Ward contends that "under clear legal authority, [he] had no duty to disclose his plans to leave and form VIEVU." We agree.

19. The trial court similarly denied a motion for summary judgment on Taser's misappropriation of trade secrets claim and concluded that "there [was] a genuine issue of material fact as to whether or not a relevant and legally recognizable trade secret existed and whether or not Defendant misappropriated or converted such a trade secret for Defendant's own use.
"In general, an employee or other agent who plans to compete with the principal does not have a duty to disclose this fact to the principal." Restatement (Third) of Agency §8.04cmt. c; see also Johnson, 80 F.3d at 1336; Johnson v. Brewer \& Pritchard, P.C., 73 S.W.3d 193, 201 (Tex.2002) ("An at-will employee may properly plan to go into competition with his employer" and "[the] employee has no general duty to disclose his plans to his employer. . . ."). To require employees to divulge such information to their employers "would create an undesirable impediment to free competition in the commercial and industrial sectors of our economy." Maryland Metals, 382 A.2d at 573 . Therefore, to the extent that Taser contends that Ward had a duty to disclose his plans to form a competing business, we reverse summary judgment and direct entry of judgment in this respect to Ward.

However, to the extent that Ward's pre-termination development efforts constituted competition, rather than merely preparations to compete, or involved the use of proprietary information, he had a duty to disclose his activities to Taser. See Restatement (Second) of Agency § 381 cmt. d (1958); United States v. Betts, 511 F.3d 872, 874-75 (9th Cir.2007) ("An employee's duty of loyalty includes a duty to . . . avoid undisclosed interests that might affect his conduct as an employee."). Because there are genuine issues of material fact as to whether Ward used proprietary information or competed with Taser during his employment, summary judgment is inappropriate for either party on the theory that he violated a duty to disclose his activities to Taser.

# NOTES AND QUESTIONS 

1. Fiduciary duty can be described as a device for economizing on transaction costs. Instead of specifying in advance exactly what the agent can and cannot do, fiduciary duty imposes a general obligation to act fairly. But how should a court determine whether an act is fair or unfair? Are the following two formulations helpful? How do they differ?
a. Fiduciary duty obliges "the fiduciary to act in the best interests of his client or beneficiary and to refrain from self-interested behavior not specifically allowed by the employment contract." Alison G. Anderson, Conflicts of Interest: Efficiency, Fairness and Corporate Structure, 25 UCLA L. Rev. 738, 760 (1978).
b. "Socially optimal fiduciary rules approximate the bargain that investors and agents would strike if they were able to dicker at no cost." Frank H. Easterbrook \& Daniel R. Fischel, Corporate Control Transactions, 91 Yale L.J. 698, 702 (1982).
2. As an alternative to relying solely on fiduciary duty, employers have often sought to contract for greater protection from post-employment competition. Courts in most states (but notably not California) have been willing to enforce noncompetition agreements if they are reasonable given the duration, geographical coverage, and the nature of the employer's legitimate business concerns.
3. The continued availably of non-compete agreements as a planning tool is uncertain as this book goes to press. On April 23, 2024, the Federal Trade Commission promulgated a new rule banning the device. It summarized this action in a sameday release:

Today, the Federal Trade Commission issued a final rule to promote competition by banning noncompetes nationwide, protecting the fundamental freedom of workers to change jobs, increasing innovation, and fostering new business formation.
"Noncompete clauses keep wages low, suppress new ideas, and rob the American economy of dynamism, including from the more than 8,500 new startups that would be created a year once noncompetes are banned," said FTC Chair Lina M. Khan. "The FTC's final rule to ban noncompetes will ensure Americans have the freedom to pursue a new job, start a new business, or bring a new idea to market."

FTC Announces Rule Banning Noncompetes, https://www.ftc.gov/news-events /news/press-releases/2024/04/ftc-announces-rule-banning-noncompetes.

Litigation challenging the rule immediately ensued in several states. On August 20, 2024, a Texas Federal District Court held that the FTC did not have statutory authority to enact the rule. Ryan, LLC v. FTC, 2024 WL 3879954 (N.D. Tex. 2024). The FTC has appealed. The enforceability of certain existing non-compete agreements and the future availability of non-competes as a planning tool depends on the outcome of the Ryan case and other litigation, as well as the new administration's approach to this topic.

[^0]: 1. He also served as Taser's vice-president of international sales.
[^0]: 4. In the reply in support of its motion for summary judgment, Taser stated that Ward "preregistered to launch [his] product at [a] [2008] Consumer Electronics Show, a process that necessarily would have been accomplished before Ward resigned." . . . Taser, however, presented no evidence that Ward registered for the 2008 show while employed at Taser. . . .
[^0]: 9. While employed as the vice-president of marketing and vice-president of international sales, Ward's responsibilities included management of marketing campaigns and strategies, developing marketing plans, developing and implementing sales channel strategies in international markets, management of Taser personnel, developing operating budgets, managing financial performance and budgets, hiring and training of sales employees, and coordinating export and import activities. Taser presents no evidence or argument that Ward was derelict in the performance of these responsibilities.
[^0]: 11. Although Ward participated in high-level executive meetings at Taser, he was not responsible for product conception, design, or development at the company. In support of its motion, Taser cites to Daniel Orifice Fitting Co. v. Whalen, 198 Cal.App.2d 791 (1962), for the proposition that it is a breach of an employee's fiduciary duty to not turn over design work accomplished during one's employment. Unlike this case, however, the employee in Whalen was an engineer employed specifically to design improvements to his employer's products and had a duty to perform those tasks for the benefit of his employer. Because Ward was not employed to design or develop products for Taser, Whalen is inapposite.
[^0]: 13. The parties vigorously dispute whether Taser planned to or was engaged in the research and development of a competing device while Ward was employed, and, if so, whether Ward was aware of any such plans or efforts. Additionally, in its filings with the trial court and on appeal, Taser makes no attempt to compare TASER CAM or TASER AXON with Ward's device. . . .
[^0]: 15. In his declaration, Ward states that: (1) "[a]t no time during [his] employment . . . did [he] use TASER's time, facilities, or resources in making preparations to form and operate VIEVU" and (2) he "used only [his] personal laptop . . . and not Taser's computers, in making preparations to form and operate VIEVU."...
[^0]: 18. To the extent that Taser points to specific information that Ward was exposed to at Taser, there is nevertheless a question of fact whether the information was proprietary or consisted of general knowledge learned in the course of his employment, and, if it was proprietary, whether it was actually used by Ward.