
State corporation laws, both judicial and statutory, provide a set of standard form, off-the-rack rules for persons wishing to own and operate an incorporated firm. It is quite easy to adopt these rules-all that is required is formation of a corporation. In other words, the standard form rules automatically attach to a corporation once it comes into existence.

In the early years of the American republic, a corporation was created by successfully petitioning a state legislature to grant a corporate charter. In modern times, corporations are almost always created via general incorporation laws. One or more incorporators need only file a chartering document with the appropriate state official, often a designee of the secretary of state. If the chartering document contains the statutorily required information, it will be immediately filed, and when filed the corporation's existence begins. Under the old special-chartering regime, the state chose who could receive the right to carry on business as a corporation and what rules would apply to each particular corporation. Special chartering provided an obvious opportunity for cronyism and corruption. Each state's legislative role now is to determine only the rules that will apply equally to every corporation the state allows to be created.

Most state corporate law norms take the form of default rules, which may be contractually changed or avoided to suit the needs of particular participants. Nonetheless, some corporate law rules are immutable, and there are important differences from state to state in the extent to which normal rules should yield to private ordering.

Under the so-called internal affairs doctrine, a long-standing and foundationally important choice-of-law rule, courts look to the laws of the state of incorporation to determine the basic rights and duties applicable to a particular corporation and its managers and investors. As a result, participants in a potential or existing business venture may shop around and choose to incorporate (or reincorporate) in whichever state offers the most attractive rules. A state has an incentive to provide attractive rules because it can collect fees and taxes directly from firms incorporating under its laws.

For more than a century Delaware has been the winner in the competition for corporation charters. Currently, more than half of the country's largest corporations are incorporated in that small, mid-Atlantic state, forty-ninth in size and forty-fifth in population among American states. ^10 The taxes and fees that Delaware annually collects from these corporations generally constitutes a third or more of its tax revenues, and most of that revenue is attributable to corporations whose principal offices, plants and operation are located outside of Delaware. As a result, Delaware has a strong incentive to maintain a corporation statute and judicial system that is viewed as adding value for companies that are or hope to become publicly-traded.

The long-dominant story about state charter competition described Delaware as winning a race to the bottom. Delaware, claimed critics, unfairly skewed its corporation laws in favor of management interests at the expense of shareholders in order to capture charter business. The ongoing competition prevented Delaware or other states from altering this status quo in order to offer more equitable corporation laws. Thus, according to the critics, the only hope for eventual equity is a federal corporation code. See William Cary's article in favor of federal regulation, Federalism and Corporate Law: Reflections upon Delaware, 83 Yale L.J. 663 (1974).

This theory, however, was strongly challenged by scholars versed in economics. Since investors choose, ex ante, whether to invest in a corporation chartered in Delaware or elsewhere, economic theory suggests that shareholders would demand a premium to invest in corporations with laws that allowed management excessive room to act opportunistically. Indeed, say many of these scholars, economic theory suggests that management should incorporate in a jurisdiction that provides laws that optimally balance the sometimes-conflicting interests of management and shareholders. Under this view, Delaware has obtained long-standing primacy in the corporation-chartering business because its laws best achieve this balance. Delaware has not maintained its lead in the competition for charters simply by virtue of the substantive content of its corporation code. While other states quickly copy its statutory innovations, they have, until now, proved unable to emulate either Delaware's reliability in adapting its laws to changed circumstances or the predictability provided by its well-developed body of case law. Delaware's court system has been a core part of Delaware's continuing advantage. All corporate law cases are heard by its Court of Chancery, which gives Court of Chancery judges (and the Delaware Supreme Court, which hears appeals) an expertise in corporate law matters unrivaled elsewhere. Additionally, Delaware's legislature has been keenly focused on fine-tuning Delaware's corporation code, and effectively overruling judicial decisions that are viewed as sub-optimal.

The Delaware legislature is also an important part of Delaware's historical success. When the judicial system produces an unpopular or problematic decision that threatens Delaware's dominance, the legislature has intervened with impressive speed. In 2024 and 2025, the legislature demonstrated its continued responsiveness in response to several controversial Delaware court decisions. In one of these cases, West Palm Beach Pension Fund v. Moelis \& Co., 311 A.3d 809 (Del. Ch. Ct. 2024), the Court of Chancery struck down contractual devices commonly used by sophisticated parties to provide control benefits to founders despite their relinquishment of voting control. Some of the devices were struck down as invalid because not accomplished via provisions in the corporation's certificate of incorporation, and others because they were inconsistent with the basic structure of Delaware corporation law and its assignment of governance authority to the directors. This decision generated fierce opposition from practitioners and provoked an immediate legislative override. It is commonly understood that this rapid legislative override of the Moelis case occurred to prevent existing and prospective Delaware corporations from taking their incorporation business elsewhere. The Moelis case and the legislative override are explored in the last section of this chapter.

A second equally controversial decision that captured not only the attention of corporate interests but also the general public was the Delaware Court of Chancery's decision to rescind Elon Musk's compensation award from Tesla valued at approximately 56 billion dollars, even though that award was approved by Tesla's shareholders both before and after the Court's decision. That case is set out and explored in Chapter 4.

These and other related judicial decisions were viewed by some leading corporation counsel and their clients as exposing Delaware corporations to unwarranted and excessive litigation risks and litigation-avoidance-procedural requirements that outweighed the advantages of incorporating in Delaware. The decisions also fueled increased interest in choosing Nevada or some state other than Delaware as the optimal place to incorporate. As Delaware is heavily dependent on the revenue it receives from its corporation-chartering-business, the legislature responded swiftly again in March of 2025, amending Sections 144 and 220 of the Delaware Corporation Code to provide greater litigation protection to controlling shareholders, along with relief for all corporations from what had become quite invasive shareholder use of books and records searches. We will explore the implications of this significant legislative action at the end of this chapter and in Chapters 4, 5, 6, and 7.

Delaware has survived challenges to its state law supremacy in the past. To take one example, Chapter 7 discusses how Delaware skillfully navigated the unfriendly takeover crisis that gripped American corporation law in the 1980s. Whether Delaware will survive this latest threat will depend on how corporations view the optimality of Delaware's attempt to recalibrate its corporation law.

Differences among state corporation codes are not as great as they once were. Most states base their corporation code on, or draw heavily from, some version of the Model Business Corporation Act ("MBCA"). The MBCA was developed (and is frequently updated) by the American Bar Association Section of Business Law, Corporate Laws Committee. Nonetheless, the Delaware General Corporation Law ("Del. G.C.L.") is equally significant as it provides the statutory framework for a majority of America's most important corporations. Moreover, the Delaware G.C.L is updated almost every year, while the MBCA adaptations follow a much slower path. Successful Delaware innovations are quickly copied by the drafters of the MBCA and Delaware keeps a close eye on MBCA innovations, adopting those it finds valuable.

In addition, there is substantial uniformity in the so-called common law of corporations. Courts in one state may borrow freely from the jurisprudence developed by courts in other states. Delaware, as the home of so many publicly traded corporations, again plays a dominant role. Delaware courts are frequently called on to decide major questions of corporate law and have developed a large body of judicial rules and precedents on major corporate law issues, and courts in other jurisdictions routinely cite Delaware cases. Indeed, Delaware case law frames much of the debate about the structure of corporate law. For this reason, you will see Delaware cases dominate the discussion in this chapter and in Chapters 4, 5, 6, 7, and 9.

It seems quite likely that if Nevada or any other state produces an attractive innovation, Delaware will tweak its statute or jurisprudence, as occurred in 2024 and 2025.
As you proceed through this chapter and those that follow, consider whether such adaptation of competing innovations constitutes a race to the bottom, or a race to the top?


[^0]: 10. Choosing where to incorporate a start-up business usually depends on the rational aspirations of the founders. If the goal is to operate a business that will grow in complexity, number of employees, need for periodic capital infusions from new investors, and, eventually, to become publicly-traded, then Delaware should be considered and will often be selected as the place to incorporate. For firms with much more limited aspirations and needs, incorporating in the state where primary operations will be situated will often, but not always, be the best choice.