
Patent claims define a patent owner's legal rights; they have been analogized to the "metes and bounds" of a real property deed. The meaning of words in the claim determine the claim boundaries. As we saw in our analysis of the novelty requirement, a claim is anticipated if the claim limitations "read on" a prior art reference. As we will see in Chapter III(F)(1), direct infringement analysis is the mirror image of novelty analysis: an accused device or process that "reads on" the claimed invention infringes the patent.

Thus, claim boundaries are critical to patent validity and infringement determinations. They are also critical to patent law's notice function. In the words of the late Federal Circuit Judge Giles Rich, one of the most influential patent lawyers (he codrafted the 1952 Patent Act) and jurists of the 20^th century, "the name of the game is the claim." Giles S. Rich, Extent of Protection and Interpretation of Claims-American Perspectives, 21 Int'l Rev. Indus. Prop. \& COPYRIGHT L. 497, 499 (1990).

Linguistically minor variations in phraseology and meaning can be the difference between a finding of infringement (and thus exclusion of the competitor, and perhaps damages) and non-infringement (and thus open entry in at least part of the patentee's market). To the hard-headed businessperson, claim interpretation defines the intangible real estate that belongs exclusively to a patentee. To a patent lawyer, precision (or a lack of precision, in some cases) is a tool of the trade. The typical businessperson looks straight to the bottom line: can the patentee exclude a competitor (expanding the reach of its exclusive legal franchise) or will it have to share shelf space and profits? That validity pushes in the opposite direction from infringement makes the analysis even more complex: a broader claim is easier to invalidate since it encompasses more potential prior art. As Judge Rich put it: "the stronger a patent the weaker it is and the weaker a patent the stronger it is." Giles S. Rich, The Proposed Patent Legislation: Some Comments, 35 Geo. Wash. L. Rev. 641, 644 (1967).

This section begins with an overview of patent claiming and claim formats. It then examines claim construction jurisprudence. We then explore functional claiming. We conclude with the claim indefiniteness doctrine.