
## Delaware G.C.L. Subchapter XV §§ 361-368

Although the business judgment rule allows a corporation to operate in what it conceives to be a socially responsible manner, and modern business statements and policies suggest an expanding embrace of a broader conception of corporate purpose, the ideology of a century ago, as reflected in Dodge v. Ford's insistence that "a business corporation is organized and carried on primarily for the profit of the stockholders [and that the powers and discretion] of the directors are to be employed for that end" continues to cast a strong practical shadow over actual corporate behavior.

Flying in the face of this story of shareholder-value primacy is a recently created business entity-in most adopting jurisdictions called a "benefit corporation." Benefit corporations are designed to combat the cultural, ideological, and investor pressures to use shareholder value maximization as the only legitimate metric for making or evaluating business decisions. A benefit corporation must have a purpose not only to pursue profit, but also to make a positive impact on society (a "public benefit"). Additionally, most benefit corporation statutes require periodic measurement of a company's public benefit performance against a reputable third-party standard, and transparent reporting of the results of such audit to shareholders and the public.

More than three-fourths of the states have passed benefit corporation statutes. Delaware's governor, upon signing his state's legislation into law, summarized the virtues of the new business form:

Delaware public benefit corporations will function like and enjoy all the same benefits as traditional Delaware corporations and they will have three unique features that make them potential game changers. These three features concern corporate purpose, accountability, and transparency.

- Corporate Purpose: Delaware public benefit corporations will have a corporate purpose "to operate in a responsible and sustainable manner." In addition, to provide directors, stockholders, and ultimately the courts, some direction, they are also required to identify in their certificate of incorporation a specific public benefit purpose the corporation is obligated to pursue. The overarching language helps ensure that a public benefit corporation serves the best long term interests of society while it creates value for its stockholders. The requirement to identify a specific public benefit purpose gives managers, directors, stockholders, and the courts, important guidance to ensure accountability, while preserving flexibility for business leaders and their investors to choose the specific public benefit purpose they feel will drive the greatest total value creation.

- Accountability: Unlike in traditional corporations, whose directors have the sole fiduciary duty to maximize stockholder value, directors of public benefit corporations are required to meet a tri-partite balancing requirement consistent with its public benefit purpose. Directors are required to balance "the pecuniary interest of stockholders, the best interests of those materially affected by the corporation's conduct, and the identified specific public benefit purpose."
- Transparency: Delaware public benefit corporations are required to report on their overall social and environmental performance, giving stockholders important information that, particularly when reported against a third-party standard, can mitigate risk and reduce transaction costs. Given the trend in public equity markets toward integrated ESG (Environmental, Social and Governance) reporting and the growing private equity market for direct impact investing, this increased transparency can help investors to aggregate capital more easily as they are able to communicate more effectively the impact, and not just the return, of their investments.

Jack Markell, A New Kind of Corporation to Harness the Power of Private Enterprise for Public Benefit, Huffington Post, July 22, 2013.

The rapid and widespread adoption of benefit corporation statutes reflects a widespread belief that the corporate form, including the fiduciary regime that we are beginning to study in this chapter, is a barrier to achieving critically important public benefits. It also reflects the efforts of committed policy activists who pushed for two innovations: first, the adoption of public benefit corporation legislation across the United States, and second, third-party certification via nonprofit B Lab. As the founders of B Lab explained:

The B Corp Movement has arisen as a result of the [embrace of capitalism and shareholder primacy in law]. In contrast to the short-term, profit-maximization vision that has dominated capitalism in past decades, the vision of the B Corp Movement entails an inclusive economy that creates a shared and durable prosperity. The goals of the movement are a society with reduced inequality, lower levels of poverty, a healthier environment, stronger communities, and more high quality jobs. In this vision, business (not investors or consumers) is the lead agent of change. It is business that creates the actual products and services and the potential investments among which we must choose; and it is business that creates the high quality jobs that both drive economic growth and uplift personal dignity. Business channels capital to human need.

B Lab, a nonprofit organization started in 2007, is the certification body for B Corporations, which are meant to serve as a concrete manifestation of the ideals of effective impact governance and management. B Lab's mission is to serve a global movement of people using business as a force for good - the B Corp Movement - so that one day all companies compete not only to be best in the world, but best for the world. B Lab does this in two ways:

First, B Lab builds a global community of leaders through a certification process. These leaders are called Certified B Corporations. They meet the highest standards of overall corporate social and environmental performance, public transparency, and legal accountability.

Second, B Lab creates paths for others to follow. These paths include impact governance tools, like the benefit corporation legal structure, and impact management tools, like the B Impact Assessment and B Analytics. . . .

B Corp Certification is much like the "fair trade" identification for coffee, "organic" label for food products, or "LEFD" certification for green buildings, but it is a certification for the whole company. To become certified, companies must first meet a minimum bar of overall social and environmental performance....

The B Impact Assessment is independently governed, and it is updated biennially to ensure accuracy and rigor. Companies must recertify every two years on the updated standard, and all B Corps pay an annual certification fee based on their revenues. Companies are also required to make the results of their assessment transparent by publishing their B Impact Report on bcorporation.net. . . .

See Andrew Kassoy, Bart Houlahan, \& Jay Coen Gilbert, Impact Governance and Management: Fulfilling the Promise of Capitalism to Achieve a Shared and Durable Prosperity, Brookings Institute (July 1, 2016). More detail on B Lab and the B Corp certification process can be found at https://www.bcorporation.net.

# NOTES AND QUESTIONS 

1. The benefit corporation model gained widespread adoption because state legislators from opposite ends of the political spectrum could support it for different reasons: "either business as a force for social good or the freedom of entrepreneurs to engage in private ordering of their business affairs." Dorothy S. Lund \& Elizabeth Pollman, The Corporate Governance Machine, 121 Colum. L. Rev. 2563, 2618 (2021). As for the latter view, the benefit corporation provides an option for businesses that wish to depart from the default governance structure that binds management to pursue shareholder value maximization as a matter of fiduciary duty. However, the benefit corporation provides only a conservative departure from the rules that apply to directors of the typical corporation. In particular, only shareholders can enforce the company's social purpose by suing directors or voting them out of office; other constituents are not given any governance rights at all. For that reason, some argue that there is not a large difference between a benefit corporation and an ordinary corporation.
2. Initially, the benefit corporation statute in Delaware provided one form of protection against shareholder activism: the statute stated that companies could only adopt or abandon benefit corporation status by a supermajority vote of the shareholders. But in 2020, the Delaware Legislature deleted this provision: today, a simple majority vote is sufficient to transform a Delaware Benefit Corporation into a traditional corporation. See DGCL §§242 (b), 251 . Of course, the reverse is also true-a majority shareholder vote is sufficient to convert a typical corporation into a benefit corporation - which may make the benefit corporation form more accessible for widely held companies.
3. Critics of the benefit corporation point to the lack of accountability to stakeholders as a key limitation. If only shareholders have standing to enforce a benefit corporation's public purpose, is it realistic to expect that the interests of other stakeholders or society will ever trump the pursuit of shareholder value? But recall our discussion of nonbinding shareholder proposals in Chapter 3. These proposals drive change at corporations in spite of the fact that management has no legal obligation to implement them. In the same way, proponents of the benefit corporation movement emphasize that legal accountability to stakeholders is not as important as providing an alternative model for business that other companies can aspire to emulate. Consider this quotation from Bart Houlahan, one of B Lab's founding members:

Our model . . . is to propose an alternative and encourage people to follow that alternative. And so what we needed to do was to find, for us, leaders. When you looked at the community of Certified B Corporations, you could identify companies that you admired. So if we go all the way back to the very beginning . . . we laid out a map for us of the stakeholders in the space in fair trade, in green building, essentially anybody who was leading in the space who believed their business had a role to play. And our objective was to find those leaders, to bring them into the community of Certified B Corporations, and then use them as our advocacy group to try to create the new legal form. That same community of leaders also serves as an inspirational group of people for others. . . . At the end of the day, it is about leadership not the certification. We never envisioned the world to be made up of Certified B Corporations; that's not the intent. The certification is a best in class, gold star certification that we hope will inspire others to follow. And so . . . going all the way back, our first stop on the roadmap was finding leaders. Finding folks who people would admire and who are going to be willing to carry this flag and lead in this community of CSR, or call it what you want, for decades. That was our target - to find leaders, to bring them onboard, and then to use them as our vehicle for advocacy in demonstrating that you could do both. You can make money and make a difference. And in fact, you can do it in a way that actually creates a more resilient business.

Larry Hamermesh, Bart Houlahan, Rick Alexander, \& Dan Osusky, A Conversation with B Lab, 40 Seattle U. L. Rev. 321, 329 (2017).
4. Whether the public benefit corporation (PBC) will become a significant legal structure remains to be seen. A recent empirical study suggests that while early returns are mixed, the benefit corporation form has gained promising traction with investors. The study's authors also see a pathway for the benefit corporation to achieve a significant place in the hierarchy of business forms.

Outside investors are critical to the success of most high-growth, startup enterprises, the type that have the potential to earn billions in revenue and employ thousands of people. These businesses typically achieve high growth rates in their early stages by sacrificing profitability for growth, spending much more than they earn to develop new products and services and market to potential customers. Without an inflow of capital to finance these early losses, these businesses will typically fail before they achieve consistent profitability. . . . The fate of the PBC form therefore depends to a great degree on investors' willingness to furnish capital to companies that have adopted one of these new forms. . . .

Overall, our empirical results present a fairly consistent picture-and one that is somewhat at odds with the traditional view that PBCs would struggle for investment against their profitmaximizing peers. We find that PBCs are receiving investment at significant rates, and that investment is coming from typical sources of venture capital. . . .

Our finding of widespread PBC investment confirms that PBCs can attract for-profit investment. But our data does not tell us whether PBCs are engaging in purpose-washing or otherwise using their social branding to yield greater profits than a traditional corporation. . . . Moreover, while our results show that PBC investment exists, and is not insignificant in dollar amounts, to date we are aware of only 707 investments in 295 PBCs-and these investments come in smaller amounts than for traditional corporations and LLCs. . . .
[Nonetheless,] [t]his steady flow of PBCs should create a network of companies that can form the basis for future entrepreneurs who want to adopt the particular goals (or branding) of a PBC. The network will furnish needed familiarity and legal precedent related to these forms so that stakeholders can contract with less uncertainty. Our study indicates that this foundation is already emergent. While the future is speculation, we expect this trend to continue. We theorize that the current nascent cycle of PBC investments will create a path for future adoption and solidify the PBC as a viable choice of corporate form. Our empirical results lead us to believe that the selection of the PBC form is more likely in areas where business models implicate direct consumer choice - and concomitantly, where the mission of the company, the investor, and the consumer align. These are areas where consumers gain utility from association with the company and its product. This will create a cycle supportive of the PBC. For those who advocate continued usage of the PBC, we believe the signs are good.

Michael B. Dorff, James Hicks, \& Steven Davidoff Solomon, The Future or Fancy? An Empirical Study of Public Benefit Corporations, 11 Harv. Bus. L. Rev. 113, 121-122, 150,157 (2021).
5. For a comprehensive look at the benefit corporation and the Certified-B-Corp movement, including its role in the publicly traded arena, see Bart Houlahan, Andrew Kassoy, \& Jay Coen Gilbert, Berle VIII: Benefit Corporations and the Firm Commitment Universe, 40 Seattle U. L. Rev. 299-819 (2017).

# PROBLEM 4-3 

Charlotte and Angela are former classmates at MIT. Having participated together in a recently failed venture, they are ready now to start afresh. The new venture, to be called DreamWater, Inc., will be the vehicle through which Charlotte and Angela develop and market Charlotte's patented invention-an ocean-water desalinization system that could revolutionize farming in coastal regions. Charlotte and Angela plan to make a large profit through sales and licenses in the developed world and to offer the product well below cost in developing countries. Charlotte and Angela also plan to be especially generous employers. To signal the priority that will be given to providing social benefit and the commitment they will make to employees, Charlotte and Angela have hired the law firm of Bickel and Howe to incorporate their venture in Delaware as a benefit corporation. As your first assignment as a summer associate at Bickel and Howe, please carefully analyze the Delaware benefit corporation provisions and provide your supervising attorney with your recommendation of what provisions should be contained in the certificate of incorporation. You may want to browse the B Lab Model Benefit Corporation Statute (available at http://benefitcorp.net/sites/ default/files/Model\%20Benefit\%20Corp\%20Legislation_4_16.pdf) and the B Lab Self-Assessment Tool (available at https://www.bcorporation.net/sites/all/themes/ adaptivetheme/bcorp/pdfs/b_lab_self_assessment.pdf) for ideas.
