
U.S. patent law requires that patents be issued in the name of the "inventor" or "inventors." §115(a) ("Naming the Inventor; Inventor's Oath or Declaration"). This requirement derives from the U.S. Constitution-which grants power to Congress to "secure for limited times to . . inventors the exclusive rights to their . . . discoveries," U.S. CONST. ART. 1, §8, CL. 8 (emphasis added)-although not necessarily so. As we will see in Chapter IV, U.S. copyright law authorizes corporations to obtain copyrights in their own name under the work-made-for-hire doctrine. See Chapter IV(D)(1)(i). Nonetheless, the Patent Act specifies that inventors are "individuals." §100(f).

Inventorship is distinct from assignments of patents. Patent applications must properly name the inventor or inventors. They can also identify the assignee of the patent.
The inventorship requirement and its associated doctrines have long served a significant role in U.S. patent law. As set forth in §102 (f) of the 1952 Act, a patent filed by someone other than the true inventor is invalid. The AIA carries forward this principle through its "derivation proceedings" to resolve claims that a patent applicant stole the invention from another. See §135. The Patent Act authorizes both the PTO ( §116 ) and the courts ( §256 ) to correct inventorship.

Scientists often work in teams, with different people collaborating on different parts of a new project. While the norm in science is to list everyone who worked on the project as a co-author on academic papers, patent law has a different and more restrictive view of inventorship. It is the act of conceiving the idea, not the actual work of reducing that idea to practice, that the courts call invention:

The arguments of both Barr and Novopharm are directed to when the inventors conceived the invention. Burroughs Wellcome says it was before they learned the results of the NIH tests; Barr and Novopharm say that confirmation of the inventions' operability, which came from the NIH tests, was an essential part of the inventive process. If Burroughs Wellcome is right, then the patents name the proper inventors, they are not invalid, and the appellants are liable for infringement. If Barr and Novopharm are correct, then Broder, Mitsuya, and Yarchoan should have been named as joint inventors and the resolution of Burroughs Wellcome's infringement suits is premature.

Conception is the touchstone of inventorship, the completion of the mental part of invention. Sewall v. Walters, 21 F.3d 411, 415 (Fed. Cir. 1994). It is 'the formation in the mind of the inventor, of a definite and permanent idea of the complete and operative invention, as it is hereafter to be applied in practice.' Hybritech Inc. v. Monoclonal Antibodies, Inc., 802 F.2d 1367, 1376 (Fed. Cir. 1986) (citation omitted). Conception is complete only when the idea is so clearly defined in the inventor's mind that only ordinary skill would be necessary to reduce the invention to practice, without extensive research or experimentation. Sewall, 21 F.3d at 415; see also Coleman v. Dines, 754 F.2d 353, 359 (Fed. Cir. 1985) (conception must include every feature of claimed invention). Because it is a mental act, courts require corroborating evidence of a contemporancous disclosure that would enable one skilled in the art to make the invention. Coleman v. Dines, 754 F. 2 d at 359.

Thus, the test for conception is whether the inventor had an idea that was definite and permanent enough that one skilled in the art could understand the invention; the inventor must prove his conception by corroborating evidence, preferably by showing a contemporancous disclosure. An idea is definite and permanent when the inventor has a specific, settled idea, a particular solution to the problem at hand, not just a general goal or research plan he hopes to pursue. See Fiers v. Revel, 984 F.2d 1164, 1169 (Fed. Cir. 1993); Amgen, Inc. v. Chugai Pharmaceutical Co., 927 F.2d 1200, 1206 (Fed. Cir. 1991) (no conception of chemical compound based solely on its biological activity). The conception analysis necessarily turns on the inventor's ability to describe his invention with particularity. Until he can do so, he cannot prove possession of the complete mental picture of the invention. These rules ensure that patent rights attach only when an idea is so far developed that the inventor can point to a definite, particular invention.

But an inventor need not know that his invention will work for conception to be complete. Applegate v. Scherer, 332 F.2d 571, 573 (CCPA 1964). He need only show that he had the idea; the discovery that an invention actually works is part of its reduction to practice. Id.; see also Oka v. Youssefyeh, 849 F.2d 581, 584 n. 1 (Fed. Cir. 1988).

Barr and Novopharm suggest that the inventor's definite and permanent idea must include a reasonable expectation that the invention will work for its intended purpose. They argue that this expectation is of paramount importance when the invention deals with uncertain or experimental disciplines, where the inventor cannot reasonably believe an idea will be operable until some result supports that conclusion. Without some experimental confirmation, they suggest, the inventor has only a hope or an expectation, and has not yet conceived the invention in sufficiently definite and permanent form. But this is not the law. An inventor's belief that his invention will work or his reasons for choosing a particular approach are irrelevant to conception. MacMillan v. Moffett, 432 F.2d 1237, 1239 (CCPA 1970).
Burroughs Wellcome v. Barr Labs, 40 F.3d 1223, 1227-28 (Fed. Cir. 1994). The court in Burroughs held that the scientists who came up AZT, an early treatment for HIV, were the sole inventors of the patent even though they didn't know the drug would work until other scientists at the National Institutes of Health tested the drug. The idea of the drug was the mental act of invention; determining that it worked for its intended purpose was simply part of reduction to practice.

Merely having an idea, however, is typically not enough to make one an inventor. Conception requires a definite and firm idea of the complete and operative invention that ultimately results. While some ideas are so simple that they can spring fully formed in the inventor's mind, many require significant work towards reduction to practice before the idea is fully formed. And if the invention changes during the process of making it work, the idea wasn't complete when it was first formulated. Indeed, some inventions, including accidental ones, cannot be conceived until they are actually reduced to practice.

The principles of conception and reduction to practice come from the law of priority, which as we have seen, see Section B(1)(vi), determined who was the first to invent under the 1952 Act. Now that we have moved to a "first inventor to file" regime, the statutory anchor for this standard for inventorship no longer exists. Should it still govern inventorship? On what legal basis?

The inventorship determination can be complicated when multiple individuals contribute to the invention or particular claims of the patent:
A joint invention is the product of a collaboration between two or more persons working together to solve the problem addressed. People may be joint inventors even though they do not physically work on the invention together or at the same time, and even though each does not make the same type or amount of contribution. 35 U.S.C. §116. The statute does not set forth the minimum quality or quantity of contribution required for joint inventorship.
Burroughs Wellcome Co. v. Barr Lab., Inc., 40 F.3d 1223, 1227 (Fed. Cir. 1994). It is enough for one to contribute conception to a single claim to be considered a joint inventor. See SmithKline Diagnostics, Inc. v. Helena Lab. Corp., 859 F.2d 878, 888 (Fed. Cir. 1988). Nonetheless, one does not qualify as a joint inventor by merely assisting the true inventor after conception of the claimed invention. See Sewall v. Walters, 21 F.3d 411 (Fed. Cir. 1994).

Due to the collaborative, uncertain, and evolutionary nature of many inventive activities, joint inventorship cases are often complex, fact-specific, and, at times, highly technical. "To show co-inventorship, the alleged co-inventor or co-inventors must prove their contribution to the conception of the claims by clear and convincing evidence." See Ethicon, Inc. v. United States Surgical Corp., 135 F.3d 1456, 1461 (Fed. Cir. 1998). "[A]n inventor's testimony respecting the facts surrounding a claim of derivation or priority of invention cannot, standing alone, rise to the level of clear and convincing proof." Price v. Symsek, 988 F.2d 1187, 1194 (Fed. Cir. 1993). Thus, an alleged coinventor must supply evidence to corroborate his testimony.

A patent filed by someone other than the true inventor is invalid. That was established by §102(f) in the 1952 Act, which barred patenting by someone who "derived" the invention from the true inventor. The AIA carries forward that principle through "derivation proceedings," which resolve allegations that a patent applicant "derived" the invention from another. See §135.

Patent law provides that both the PTO (\$116) and the courts (\$256) can correct inventorship, and that the patent is not invalid if inventorship can be corrected. Correction is even possible when it involves a complete substitution of inventors. That is, if $AstealsaninventionfromBandpatentsitintheirownname,B$ may be able to have inventorship corrected so that the patent is still valid but now $Bisthesoleinventor.B$ may have other claims as well based on the theft. See Univ. of Colorado Found. v. American Cyanamid Co., 196 F.3d 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2003) (awarding damages for fraud and unjust enrichment against company that stole invention and patented it in its own name).

Before the AIA, the ability to correct inventorship depended on the good faith of the parties involved. Under current law, correction is possible even if the original misjoinder of inventors was fraud rather than error. That makes correction substantially easier, and should make it more common, though the Federal Circuit has been careful to require corroboration to police opportunistic claims of invention.

Inventorship does not only matter for ownership; it also affects prior art. An inventor's own acts cannot count as prior art under §102(a) of the 1952 Act, and are subject to the grace period under the AIA. But that is true only if the individual or group of individuals who created the prior art are the same as the individuals that apply for a patent. Prior conduct by an overlapping but not identical group can be prior art that bars the group from obtaining a patent. Thus, in Google LLC v. IPA Techs. Inc., 34 F.4th 1081 (Fed. Cir. 2022), the court held that a paper by three individuals could be prior art against a patent on the same invention later filed only by two of them. Congress has limited the effects of this rule by providing that inventions that are obvious in view of each other are not prior art if the inventions are all required to be assigned to the same company anyway. §103(c).

As the following case illustrates, the advent of generative artificial intelligence raises a host of novel inventorship questions.

# Thaler v. Vidal <br> United States Court of Appeals, Federal Circuit 43 F.4th 1207 (2022) 

Stark, Circuit Judge.
This case presents the question of who, or what, can be an inventor. Specifically, we are asked to decide if an artificial intelligence (AI) software system can be listed as the inventor on a patent application. At first, it might seem that resolving this issue would involve an abstract inquiry into the nature of invention or the rights, if any, of AI systems. In fact, however, we do not need to ponder these metaphysical matters. Instead, our task begins-and ends-with consideration of the applicable definition in the relevant statute.

The United States Patent and Trademark Office (PTO) undertook the same analysis and concluded that the Patent Act defines "inventor" as limited to natural persons; that is, human beings. Accordingly, the PTO denied Stephen Thaler's patent applications, which failed to list any human as an inventor. . . .

## I

Thaler represents that he develops and runs AI systems that generate patentable inventions. One such system is his "Device for the Autonomous Bootstrapping of Unified Science," which Thaler calls "DABUS." Thaler has described DABUS as "a collection of source code or programming and a software program."

In July 2019, Thaler sought patent protection for two of DABUS' putative inventions by filing two patent applications with the PTO: U.S. Application Nos. 16/524,350 (teaching a "Neural Flame") and 16/524,532 (teaching a "Fractal Container"). He listed DABUS as the sole inventor on both applications. Thaler maintains that he did not contribute to the conception of these inventions and that any person having skill in the art could have taken DABUS' output and reduced the ideas in the applications to practice.
In lieu of an inventor's last name, Thaler wrote on the applications that "the invention [was] generated by artificial intelligence." . . . Thaler filed a document purporting to assign himself all of DABUS' rights as an inventor.
. . . The PTO denied Thaler's petitions on the ground that "a machine does not qualify as an inventor." . . .

# II 

... Challenges to PTO petition decisions are governed by the APA and pertinent administrative law standards. Thus, we may set aside the judgment resulting from an administrative adjudication only if the agency's decision is "arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with law" or if the agency's actions are "in excess of statutory jurisdiction, authority, or limitations." 5 U.S.C. §706. "Statutory interpretation is an issue of law that we review de novo."

A The sole issue on appeal is whether an AI software system can be an "inventor" under the Patent Act. In resolving disputes of statutory interpretation, we "begin[ ] with the statutory text, and end[ ] there as well if the text is unambiguous." Here, there is no ambiguity: the Patent Act requires that inventors must be natural persons; that is, human beings.

The Patent Act expressly provides that inventors are "individuals." Since 2011, with the passage of the Leahy-Smith America Invents Act, the Patent Act has defined an "inventor" as "the individual or, if a joint invention, the individuals collectively who invented or discovered the subject matter of the invention." 35 U.S.C. §100(f) (emphasis added). The Act similarly defines "joint inventor" and "coinventor" as "any 1 of the individuals who invented or discovered the subject matter of a joint invention." §100(~g) (emphasis added). In describing the statements required of an inventor when applying for a patent, the statute consistently refers to inventors and co-inventors as "individuals." See §115.

The Patent Act does not define "individual." However, as the Supreme Court has explained, when used "[a]s a noun, 'individual' ordinarily means a human being, a person." Mohamad v. Palestinian Auth., 566 U.S. 449, 454 (2012) (internal alteration and quotation marks omitted). This is in accord with "how we use the word in everyday parlance": "We say 'the individual went to the store,' 'the individual left the room,' and 'the individual took the car,' each time referring unmistakably to a natural person." Id. Dictionaries confirm that this is the common understanding of the word. See, e.g., Individual, Oxford English Dictionary (2022) (giving first definition of "individual" as "[a] single human being"); Individual, Dictionary.com (last visited July 11, 2022), https://www.dictionary.com/browse/individual (giving "a single human being, as distinguished from a group" as first definition for "individual"). So, too, does the Dictionary Act, which provides that legislative use of the words "person" and "whoever" broadly include ("unless the context indicates otherwise") "corporations, companies, associations, firms, partnerships, societies, and joint stock companies, as well as individuals." 1 U.S.C. §1 (emphasis added). "With the phrase 'as well as,' the definition marks 'individual' as distinct from the list of artificial entities that precedes it," showing that Congress understands "individual" to indicate natural persons unless otherwise noted. Mohamad, 566 U.S. at 454.

Consequently, the Supreme Court has held that, when used in statutes, the word "individual" refers to human beings unless there is "some indication Congress intended" a different reading. Id. at 455 (emphasis omitted). Nothing in the Patent Act indicates Congress intended to deviate from the default meaning. To the contrary, the rest of the Patent Act supports the conclusion that "individual" in the Act refers to human beings.
. . . The Patent Act also requires inventors (unless deceased, incapacitated, or unavailable) to submit an oath or declaration. See [§115(b)(2)] (requiring oath or declaration from inventor that "such individual believes himself or herself to be the original inventor or an original joint inventor of a claimed invention in the application"). While we do not decide whether an AI system can form beliefs, nothing in our record shows that one can, as reflected in the fact that Thaler submitted the requisite statements himself, purportedly on DABUS' behalf.

Thaler directs us to several provisions of the Patent Act as supposed support for his position that "inventor" should be broadly read to include AI software, but each fails to persuade. First, Thaler points to the use of "whoever" in 35 U.S.C. §§101 and 271. Section 101 provides that "[w]hoever invents or discovers any new and useful process, machine, manufacture, or composition of matter, or any new and useful improvement thereof, may obtain a patent therefor, subject to the conditions and requirements of this title." As this very section makes clear, however, patents must satisfy the "conditions and requirements of" Title 35 of the U.S. Code, including its definition of "inventor." Section 271, in setting out what constitutes infringement, repeatedly uses "whoever" to include corporations and other non-human entities. That non-humans may infringe patents does not tell us anything about whether non-humans may also be inventors of patents. The question before us inevitably leads back to the Patent Act's definition of "inventor," which uses the word "individual"-and does not use "whoever." Furthermore, as we noted already, the Dictionary Act establishes that Congress uses "whoever" as a much broader term than "individual." See 1 U.S.C. §1.

Second, Thaler contends that AI software programs must qualify as inventors because otherwise patentability would depend on "the manner in which the invention was made," in contravention of 35 U.S.C. §103. Section 103 is not about inventorship. Instead, it provides, in relevant part, that inventions may still be nonobvious even if they are discovered during "routine" testing or experimentation. See Honeywell Int'l Inc. v. Mexichem Amanco Holding S.A. de C.V., 865 F.3d 1348, 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2017); see also Graham v. John Deere Co., 383 U.S. 1, 15 (1966) (explaining that second sentence of §103 was intended to clarify that "flash of creative genius" is unnecessary for patentability). This statutory provision relates to how an invention is made and does not trump a provision that specifically addresses who may be an inventor.

Third, Thaler emphasizes that the term "inventor" must be interpreted with attention to the "context in which that language is used[ ] and the broader context of the statute as a whole." Yates v. United States, 574 U.S. 528, 537 (2015) (internal quotation marks omitted). We have undertaken precisely this task. For the reasons explained above, the Patent Act, when considered in its entirety, confirms that "inventors" must be human beings.

# B 

Our holding today that an "inventor" must be a human being is supported by our own precedent. See Univ. of Utah v. Max-Planck-Gesellschaft zur Forderung der Wissenschaften E.V., 734 F.3d 1315, 1323 (Fed. Cir. 2013) ("[I]nventors must be natural persons and cannot be corporations or sovereigns.") (emphasis added); Beech Aircraft Corp. v. EDO Corp., 990 F.2d 1237, 1248 (Fed. Cir. 1993) ("[O]nly natural persons can be 'inventors.' "). While these opinions addressed different questionsconcluding that neither corporations nor sovereigns can be inventors-our reasoning did not depend on the fact that institutions are collective entities. The two cases confirm that the plain meaning of "inventor" in the Patent Act is limited to natural persons.

## III

We briefly address Thaler's additional arguments.
Thaler argues that inventions generated by AI should be patentable in order to encourage innovation and public disclosure. Thaler's policy arguments are speculative and lack a basis in the text of the Patent Act and in the record. . . . Moreover, we are not confronted today with the question of whether inventions made by human beings with the assistance of AI are eligible for patent protection.

Thaler invokes the canon of constitutional avoidance. In Thaler's view, permitting AI programs to be inventors would support the constitutional purpose of patents "[t]o promote the progress of science and the useful arts." U.S. Const. art. I, §8, cl. 8. It follows, Thaler continues, that not recognizing AI as an inventor undermines such progress, raising potential constitutional concerns we should be careful to avoid. Thaler is incorrect. The constitutional provision he cites is a grant of legislative power to Congress; Congress has chosen to act pursuant to that power by passing the Patent Act. Thaler does not (and cannot) argue that limiting inventorship to human beings is unconstitutional. Therefore, the canon of constitutional avoidance is simply inapplicable. . . .

Thaler also notes that South Africa has granted patents with DABUS as an inventor. This foreign patent office was not interpreting our Patent Act. Its determination does not alter our conclusion. . . .

## IV

When a statute unambiguously and directly answers the question before us, our analysis does not stray beyond the plain text. Here, Congress has determined that only a natural person can be an inventor, so AI cannot be. Accordingly, the decision of the district court is affirmed.

AFFIRMED
# COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS 

1. Neither the drafters of the U.S. Constitution nor the drafters of the patent statutes considered the possibility of AI-generated inventions and discoveries. Does the court's textual analysis make sense in resolving the patentability of AI inventions? Could the court have analogized artificial intelligence to human intelligence?
2. Joint Human-AI Inventorship? Although Thaler forecloses AI machines as sole inventors, it leaves open the patentability of inventions in which humans use machines to co-invent and co-discover new and useful processes, machines, manufactures, and compositions of matter. Humans have long used machines, including computers, in the process of inventing and discovering. They are increasingly using AI technology as part of the inventive process, resulting in a rising tide of AI-assisted patent applications. The Patent Office is currently considering how to examine inventions and discoveries made with the new generation of generative artificial intelligence technology. How should the Patent Office assess these applications? Is it enough for humans to pose insightful prompts to Large Language Models (LLMs). See Yuan Hao, The Rise of "Centaur" Inventors: How Patent Law Should Adapt to the Challenge to Inventorship Doctrine by Human-AI Inventing Synergies, 104 J. Pat. \& Trademark Off. Soc'y 71 (2024) (suggesting the concept of "constructive conception" when AI software assists a human inventor in conceiving of a patentable invention).
3. Stephen Thaler asserted that the patenting of AI-generated inventions would promote progress. Do you agree? Consider the utilitarian framework introduced in Chapter 1, as well the potential for a proliferation of patents generated by increasingly "intelligent" machines. Does generative AI require rethinking of the patent system?