
As noted earlier, the lasting impact of the Paris Convention was primarily procedural, especially with respect to the uniform, worldwide priority date it made possible. The Paris Convention did, however, contain some minimum substantive standards of protection, as described earlier. Even so, further efforts at harmonizing worldwide standards of patentability, patentees' rights, and infringement bore little fruit for most of the twentieth century.

Harmonization proceeded slowly because the international business community had little interest in parsing the detailed, esoteric issues that harmonization requires. Although it was cumbersome to deal with the divergent standards held by the world's many individual domestic patent jurisdictions, some level of effective protection was available in most of the commercially important countries. Furthermore, patent law harmonization was the domain of a highly specialized affiliate of the United Nations, the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO), a forum not thought to be particularly friendly to Western business interests.

Things were changing by the mid-1980s, however. For one thing, the perceived value of intellectual property was increasing; it was beginning to take on a more central role in business planning and strategy. Of special concern was the increasing importance to U.S. businesses of overseas markets in developing countries-countries that had traditionally opposed strong intellectual property protection. Businesses in the United States and Europe, aware both of the increasing importance of intellectual property and of WIPO's slow progress in harmonization, were thus on the lookout for an alternative forum in which to pursue harmonization. The search ended with the announcement of the Uruguay Round of negotiations to revise the main international trade agreement/organization, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT).

In addition to proposed reforms to the core function and structure of the GATT, the early Uruguay Round agenda soon grew to encompass negotiations on the "TradeRelated Aspects of Intellectual Property," or TRIPs, as it became known. The reference in the title to "Trade-Related" issues was a concession to those who doubted the relevance of intellectual property to the basic GATT mission; it soon became clear, however, that most of the basic elements of intellectual property protection would be up for discussion and potential harmonization in the TRIPs negotiations. By the time the GATT round ended in late 1993, TRIPs had become one of the principal components in the overall package of changes. See Robert P. Merges, National Sovereignty and International Patent Law, MiCH. ST. L. REV. (forthcoming 2020) (comparing the Paris Convention and TRIPs)..

Although the post-TRIPs amendments to U.S. law are important, they pale in contrast to the revolutionary changes the agreement makes to the intellectual property regimes of many developing countries. To summarize the highlights, all signatories of the Uruguay Round treaty (who, under the agreement, become members of the World Trade Organization (WTO)) must now:

- Include virtually all important commercial fields within the ambit of patentable subject matter, a major change for countries that, for example, have traditionally refused to enforce pharmaceutical patents on public health/access grounds.
- Test patent applications for (a) the presence of an inventive step, which is defined as precisely synonymous with nonobviousness under §103 of the U.S. Patent Act, and for (b) "industrial application," similarly defined as coextensive with the U.S. utility requirement.
- Include in the patentees' bundle of exclusive rights the right to control the market for imports of the patented products.
- Eliminate or severely curtail the practice of granting compulsory licenses for patented technology.
See Final Act Embodying the Results of the Uruguay Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations, Apr. 15, 1994 2-3 (GATT Secretariat 1994); Annex 1C: Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights, id. at 6-19, 365-403. For implementation in the United States, Uruguay Round Agreements Act, Pub. L. No. 103465 (H.R. 5110), Dec. 8, 1994. See also J.H. Reichman, Universal Minimum Standards of Intellectual Property Protection Under the TRIPs Component of the WTO Agreement, 29 INT'L LAW. 345 (1995) (able summary of provisions and open questions).

The most important GATT-related changes to U.S. law were:

- Changing the U.S. patent term to 20 years, measured from the date the patent application is filed, rather than 17 years from the date the patent was issued by the Patent Office. §154. (Under certain circumstances, such as interferences and appealed rejections, this term may be extended for up to five years. Id.).
- Opening up the U.S. "first-to-invent" system by allowing members of the WTO to introduce evidence of inventive acts in their home country for purposes of establishing priority. §104.
- Expanding the definition of infringement to include acts of unauthorized offering for sale and importing. §271.
- Adding a new procedure for filing "provisional applications," §111, which must satisfy §112 but need not include claims. Such an application does not begin the 20 -year clock for the applicant's patent term.
- Requiring publication of U.S. patent applications covering inventions also claimed in foreign applications. §122(b).
These changes furthered the substantive harmonization of world patent law by bringing the United States into line with the rest of the world on a number of important issues. The AIA further harmonized U.S. patent law with patent law in many other nations. So long as patent applicants must file and prosecute (and pay fees) in each country in which they require protection, however, the impact of substantive harmonization will be limited.

In addition to worldwide harmonization, Europe has also taken significant steps to harmonize its patent law, with mixed results. European countries have for decades been able to file a single patent application at the European Patent Office instead of filing in member state patent offices. European patents may also someday be enforced in a Europe-wide patent court, a vision that has not yet come to fruition. In both instances, however, the pan-European system supplements rather than replaces the national systems of prosecution and enforcement, leaving a hodgepodge of national and EUlevel rights.
