
As we have seen, the rights conferred by a patent are different from those that grow out of real property rights. On the other hand, there are a number of similarities between patent law and real property law. With patents, as with most other legal entitlements that share the label "property," the traditional rule has been that the owner of the property right may obtain an injunction to prevent ongoing "trespasses." Indeed, in one important conceptual framework used to describe many types of legal entitlements, it is the injunctive remedy that distinguishes the property right from other entitlements. See Guido Calabresi \& A. Douglas Melamed, Property Rules, Liability Rules, and Inalienability: One View of the Cathedral, 85 HARV. L. REV. 1089 (1972).

According to Calabresi and Melamed, the extent and nature of transaction costs in a particular case dictate whether one of the parties ought to have an absolute property right or simply the right to collect damages caused by the other party's encroachment. Within this framework, several factors point toward a property rule: few parties, difficult valuation problems, and otherwise low transaction costs. Other factors indicate that a liability rule might better effectuate the bargain: many parties (especially where any one has the power to "hold up" the whole enterprise), likelihood of strategic bargaining, and otherwise high transaction costs.

The holder of a legal entitlement other than a property right can obtain compensation when the right is violated but cannot prevent violations. Because those who violate such a right must pay damages, this form of entitlement is referred to as a liability rule. Classic examples of liability rule entitlements (which we will call "liability rights") are the rights of tort victims, parties facing a breach of an ordinary commercial contract, and landowners whose parcels are taken by the government for public use pursuant to eminent domain.

Comparing patent rights to contract rights illuminates the challenges of compensating patentees for infringement. Take, for example, a contract for delivery of 100 bushels of wheat at $5.00 per bushel. If the seller breaches, contract law provides the buyer the difference between the contract price and the market price at the time of breach. Since wheat is a standard commodity, the market price can be easily determined based on commodity exchanges at the time.

By contrast, patent infringement poses a valuation challenge: Patent rights are unique. A patent might not be co-extensive with a particular product (e.g., a smartphone comprises many patented technologies). Infringing activity can affect the trajectory of the patentee's business over the remaining life of the patent.

The effect of injunctive remedies goes beyond allowing the rightholder to prevent activities of the infringer. To the extent that a rightholder will consider negotiating a license with the infringer, the threat of an injunction will heavily influence the terms of the license. Specifically, it allows the rightholder to set her own price for the injury. In intellectual property cases, it allows the rightholder, and not a court, to set the terms of a license agreement settling the infringement litigation. This is assumed to be the efficient result, as a court called on to set the terms of the exchange would have a difficult time doing so quickly and cheaply given the specialized nature of the assets and the varied and complex business environments in which they are deployed. Hence the parties are left to make their own deal.


The Supreme Court confronted this issue in 2006. But it did not limit its decision to holdup situations.
# eBay, Inc. v. MercExchange, LLC Supreme Court of the United States 547 U.S. 388 (2006) 

JUSTICE THOMAS delivered the opinion of the Court.
Ordinarily, a federal court considering whether to award permanent injunctive relief to a prevailing plaintiff applies the four-factor test historically employed by courts of equity. Petitioner[] eBay Inc. argue[s] that this traditional test applies to disputes arising under the Patent Act. We agree and, accordingly, vacate the judgment of the Court of Appeals.

## I

Petitioner eBay operates a popular Internet Web site that allows private sellers to list goods they wish to sell, either through an auction or at a fixed price. . . . Respondent MercExchange, L.L.C., holds a number of patents, including a business method patent for an electronic market designed to facilitate the sale of goods between private individuals by establishing a central authority to promote trust among participants. See U.S. Patent No. 5,845,265. MercExchange sought to license its patent to eBay . . . , as it had previously done with other companies, but the parties failed to reach an agreement. MercExchange subsequently filed a patent infringement suit against eBay ... A jury found that MercExchange's patent was valid, that eBay . . . had infringed that patent, and that an award of damages was appropriate.

Following the jury verdict, the District Court denied MercExchange's motion for permanent injunctive relief. The Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit reversed, applying its "general rule that courts will issue permanent injunctions against patent infringement absent exceptional circumstances." We granted certiorari to determine the appropriateness of this general rule.

## II

According to well-established principles of equity, a plaintiff seeking a permanent injunction must satisfy a four-factor test before a court may grant such relief. A plaintiff must demonstrate: (1) that it has suffered an irreparable injury; (2) that remedies available at law, such as monetary damages, are inadequate to compensate for that injury; (3) that, considering the balance of hardships between the plaintiff and defendant, a remedy in equity is warranted; and (4) that the public interest would not be disserved by a permanent injunction. See, e.g., Weinberger v. Romero-Barcelo, 456 U.S. 305, 311-313 (1982); Amoco Production Co. v. Gambell, 480 U.S. 531, 542, (1987). The decision to grant or deny permanent injunctive relief is an act of equitable discretion by the district court, reviewable on appeal for abuse of discretion. See, e.g., RomeroBarcelo, 456 U.S., at 320 .

These familiar principles apply with equal force to disputes arising under the Patent Act. As this Court has long recognized, "a major departure from the long tradition of equity practice should not be lightly implied." Ibid. Nothing in the Patent Act indicates that Congress intended such a departure. To the contrary, the Patent Act expressly provides that injunctions "may" issue "in accordance with the principles of equity." 35 U.S.C. §283.

To be sure, the Patent Act also declares that "patents shall have the attributes of personal property," §261, including "the right to exclude others from making, using, offering for sale, or selling the invention," §154(a)(1). According to the Court of Appeals, this statutory right to exclude alone justifies its general rule in favor of permanent injunctive relief. But the creation of a right is distinct from the provision of remedies for violations of that right. Indeed, the Patent Act itself indicates that patents shall have the attributes of personal property "[s]ubject to the provisions of this title," 35 U.S.C. §261, including, presumably, the provision that injunctive relief "may" issue only "in accordance with the principles of equity," §283.

This approach is consistent with our treatment of injunctions under the Copyright Act. Like a patent owner, a copyright holder possesses "the right to exclude others from using his property." Fox Film Corp. v. Doyal, 286 U.S. 123, 127 (1932); see also id., at 127-128 ("A copyright, like a patent, is at once the equivalent given by the public for benefits bestowed by the genius and meditations and skill of individuals, and the incentive to further efforts for the same important objects" (internal quotation marks omitted)). Like the Patent Act, the Copyright Act provides that courts "may" grant injunctive relief "on such terms as it may deem reasonable to prevent or restrain infringement of a copyright." 17 U.S.C. §502(a). And as in our decision today, this Court has consistently rejected invitations to replace traditional equitable considerations with a rule that an injunction automatically follows a determination that a copyright has been infringed. See, e.g., New York Times Co. v. Tasini, 533 U.S. 483, 505 (2001) (citing Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569, 578 n. 10 (1994)); Dun v. Lumbermen's Credit Ass'n, 209 U.S. 20, 23-24 (1908).

Neither the District Court nor the Court of Appeals below fairly applied these traditional equitable principles in deciding respondent's motion for a permanent injunction. Although the District Court recited the traditional four-factor test, it appeared to adopt certain expansive principles suggesting that injunctive relief could not issue in a broad swath of cases. Most notably, it concluded that a "plaintiff's willingness to license its patents" and "its lack of commercial activity in practicing the patents" would be sufficient to establish that the patent holder would not suffer irreparable harm if an injunction did not issue. But traditional equitable principles do not permit such broad classifications. For example, some patent holders, such as university researchers or self-made inventors, might reasonably prefer to license their patents, rather than undertake efforts to secure the financing necessary to bring their works to market themselves. Such patent holders may be able to satisfy the traditional four-factor test, and we see no basis for categorically denying them the opportunity to do so. To the extent that the District Court adopted such a categorical rule, then, its analysis cannot be squared with the principles of equity adopted by Congress. The court's categorical rule is also in tension with Continental Paper Bag Co. v. Eastern Paper Bag Co., 210 U.S. 405, 422-430 (1908), which rejected the contention that a court of equity has no jurisdiction to grant injunctive relicf to a patent holder who has unreasonably declined to use the patent.

In reversing the District Court, the Court of Appeals departed in the opposite direction from the four-factor test. The court articulated a "general rule," unique to patent disputes, "that a permanent injunction will issue once infringement and validity have been adjudged." The court further indicated that injunctions should be denied only in the "unusual" case, under "exceptional circumstances" and "'in rare instances . . . to protect the public interest." Just as the District Court erred in its categorical denial of injunctive relief, the Court of Appeals erred in its categorical grant of such relicf. Cf. Roche Products v. Bolar Pharmaceutical Co., 733 F.2d 858, 865 (C.A. Fed. 1984) (recognizing the "considerable discretion" district courts have "in determining whether the facts of a situation require it to issue an injunction").

Because we conclude that neither court below correctly applied the traditional fourfactor framework that governs the award of injunctive relief, we vacate the judgment of the Court of Appeals, so that the District Court may apply that framework in the first instance. In doing so, we take no position on whether permanent injunctive relief should or should not issue in this particular case, or indeed in any number of other disputes arising under the Patent Act. We hold only that the decision whether to grant or deny injunctive relief rests within the equitable discretion of the district courts, and that such discretion must be exercised consistent with traditional principles of equity, in patent disputes no less than in other cases governed by such standards.

Accordingly, we vacate the judgment of the Court of Appeals, and remand for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.

It is so ordered.
Chief Justice Roberts, with whom Justice Scalia and Justice Ginsburg join, concurring.

I agree with the Court's holding that "the decision whether to grant or deny injunctive relief rests within the equitable discretion of the district courts, and that such discretion must be exercised consistent with traditional principles of equity, in patent disputes no less than in other cases governed by such standards," and I join the opinion of the Court. That opinion rightly rests on the proposition that "a major departure from the long tradition of equity practice should not be lightly implied." Weinberger v. Romero-Barcelo, 456 U.S. 305, 320 (1982).

From at least the early 19th century, courts have granted injunctive relief upon a finding of infringement in the vast majority of patent cases. This "long tradition of equity practice" is not surprising, given the difficulty of protecting a right to exclude through monetary remedies that allow an infringer to use an invention against the patentee's wishes-a difficulty that often implicates the first two factors of the traditional four-factor test. This historical practice, as the Court holds, does not entitle a patentee to a permanent injunction or justify a general rule that such injunctions should issue. The Federal Circuit itself so recognized in Roche Products, Inc. v. Bolar Pharmaceutical Co., 733 F.2d 858, 865-867 (1984). At the same time, there is a difference between exercising equitable discretion pursuant to the established fourfactor test and writing on an entirely clean slate. "Discretion is not whim, and limiting discretion according to legal standards helps promote the basic principle of justice that like cases should be decided alike." Martin v. Franklin Capital Corp., 546 U.S. 132, 139 (2005). When it comes to discerning and applying those standards, in this area as others, "a page of history is worth a volume of logic." New York Trust Co. v. Eisner, 256 U.S. 345, 349 (1921) (opinion for the Court by Holmes, J.).
Justice Kennedy, with whom Justice Stevens, Justice Souter, and Justice BREYER join, concurring.

The Court is correct, in my view, to hold that courts should apply the wellestablished, four-factor test-without resort to categorical rules-in deciding whether to grant injunctive relief in patent cases. The Chief Justice is also correct that history may be instructive in applying this test. (concurring opinion). The traditional practice of issuing injunctions against patent infringers, however, does not seem to rest on "the difficulty of protecting a right to exclude through monetary remedies that allow an infringer to use an invention against the patentee's wishes." (Roberts, C.J., concurring). Both the terms of the Patent Act and the traditional view of injunctive relief accept that the existence of a right to exclude does not dictate the remedy for a violation of that right. To the extent carlicr cases establish a pattern of granting an injunction against patent infringers almost as a matter of course, this pattern simply illustrates the result of the four-factor test in the contexts then prevalent. The lesson of the historical practice, therefore, is most helpful and instructive when the circumstances of a case bear substantial parallels to litigation the courts have confronted before.

In cases now arising trial courts should bear in mind that in many instances the nature of the patent being enforced and the economic function of the patent holder present considerations quite unlike earlier cases. An industry has developed in which firms use patents not as a basis for producing and selling goods but, instead, primarily for obtaining licensing fees. See FTC, To Promote Innovation: The Proper Balance of Competition and Patent Law and Policy, ch. 3, pp. 38-39 (Oct. 2003). For these firms, an injunction, and the potentially serious sanctions arising from its violation, can be employed as a bargaining tool to charge exorbitant fees to companies that seek to buy licenses to practice the patent. See ibid. When the patented invention is but a small component of the product the companies seek to produce and the threat of an injunction is employed simply for undue leverage in negotiations, legal damages may well be sufficient to compensate for the infringement and an injunction may not serve the public interest. In addition injunctive relief may have different consequences for the burgeoning number of patents over business methods, which were not of much economic and legal significance in earlier times. The potential vagueness and suspect validity of some of these patents may affect the calculus under the fourfactor test.

The equitable discretion over injunctions, granted by the Patent Act, is well suited to allow courts to adapt to the rapid technological and legal developments in the patent system. For these reasons it should be recognized that district courts must determine whether past practice fits the circumstances of the cases before them. With these observations, I join the opinion of the Court.

# COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS 

1. This Supreme Court ruling has had an immediate and profound impact on patent litigation. See Christopher B. Scaman, Permanent Injunctions in Patent Litigation After eBay: An Empirical Study, 101 Iowa L. Rev. 1949 (2016) (noting that non-practicing entities are much less likely to obtain injunctions after eBay.)
2. Leading remedies scholars question whether the Supreme Court's eBay test comports with long-standing remedial standards for permanent injunctions. Their research indicates that the Supreme Court aligns more closely with the test for preliminary injunctions, a judgment which is rendered before the violation has been conclusively established. See Mark P. Gergen, John M. Golden \& Henry E. Smith, The Supreme Court's Accidental Revolution? The Test for Permanent Injunctions, 112 Colum. L. Rev. 203, 208 (2012). While there was no explicit four-factor test for permanent injunctions, each of the factors the Court relics on is a factor courts have regularly applied in deciding whether to grant injunctions.
3. Should the availability of injunctions depend on whether the patentee manufactures the patented product or is simply in the business of licensing (and litigating) patents? What if the plaintiff has as its business model the acquisition of thirdparty patents, strictly with an eye toward maximizing patent-related revenue by suing as many actual manufacturers as possible? As patents have become more valuable, these and related issues are finding their way into legal arguments regarding the desirability of injunctions and other remedies. Most lower court decisions have split along these lines, granting injunctive relief to patentees who participate in the market but denying injunctive relief to non-practicing entities because they cannot satisfy eBay's four-factor test.
4. Ongoing Royalties. In Paice LLC v. Toyota Motor Corp., 609 F.Supp.2d 620 (E.D. Tex. 2009), the court found that Toyota's hybrid automobiles infringed Paice's patent on a microprocessor and controllable torque transfer unit that accepts input from both an internal combustion engine and an electric motor. The court determined that a permanent injunction is not warranted and awarded a running royalty of $98 per vehicle, nearly four times the award of past damages. Does it make sense to deny an injunction but at the same time punish the defendant by charging a higher royalty rate going forward? See Mark A. Lemley, The Ongoing Confusion Over Ongoing Royalties, 76 MO. L. REV. (2011) (no).
