
As the Sinclair case makes clear, controlling shareholders owe fiduciary duties to the minority shareholders; moreover, transactions where a controlling stockholder stands on both sides of the transaction and receives a non-ratable benefit are presumptively subject to heightened scrutiny. And yet, the determination of whether a shareholder owes fiduciary duties hinges on whether the shareholder is deemed to control the corporation. Without evidence of control, shareholders are free to act in their selfinterest. How do Delaware courts determine whether a shareholder counts as a controller? The case below provided an answer to this question and more, in litigation challenging a record-setting compensation package for Tesla's CEO and 21.9 percent shareholder, Elon Musk. The decision below generated significant controversy and public criticism of the Delaware Chancery Court, as well as a sweeping legislative correction less than a year later (discussed in the next section). As you read the case, ask yourself whether the decision was rightly or wrongly decided and why.

Tornetta v. Musk<br>Delaware Court of Chancery, 2024<br>310 A.3d 430

McCormick, C.*
Was the richest person in the world overpaid? The stockholder plaintiff in this derivative lawsuit says so. He claims that Tesla, Inc.'s directors breached their fiduciary duties by awarding Elon Musk a performance-based equity-compensation plan [the "2018 Grant"]. . . . With a $55.8 billion maximum value and $2.6 billion grant date fair value, the [2018 Grant] is the largest potential compensation opportunity ever observed in public markets by multiple orders of magnitude - 250 times larger than the contemporancous median peer compensation plan and over 33 times larger than the plan's closest comparison, which was Musk's prior compensation plan. [At all relevant times, Tesla had a nine-member board of directors, with four members of the Board serving as a standing Compensation Committee. Serving on both the Board and the Compensation Committee were Ira Ehrenpreis, Brad Buss, Robyn Denholm, and Antonio Gracias. The other directors were Musk, his brother Kimbal, Steve Jurvetson, James Murdoch, and Linda Johnson Rice.] Musk and Kimbal recused themselves from most of the meetings and all of the votes on the 2018 Grant, and Jurvetson had prolonged leaves of absence during the relevant period. The fiduciaries responsible for Tesla in connection with the 2018 Grant, therefore, were the Compensation Committee members plus James Murdoch and Linda Johnson Rice.

# I. Factual Background 

## . . . A. TESLA AND ITS VISIONARY LEADER

Tesla is a vertically integrated clean-energy company. Tesla and its employees "design, develop, manufacture, sell and lease high-performance fully electric vehicles and energy generation and storage systems." As of December 31, 2021, Tesla and its subsidiaries had nearly 100,000 full-time employees worldwide, and its market capitalization was over $1 trillion.

Tesla's success came relatively recently and, by all accounts, was made possible by Musk. In 2004, Musk led Tesla's Series A financing round, investing $6.5 million. He would invest considerably more before the company went public, take on the role of chairman of Tesla's Board of Directors (the "Board") (from April 2004 to November 2018), and, ultimately, become Tesla's CEO (since October 2008). Musk possesses the ability to "dr[aw] others into his vision of the possible" and "inspir[e] . . . his workers to achieve the improbable." And although Musk was not at the helm of Tesla at its inception, he became the driving visionary responsible for Tesla's growth. He earned the title "founder."

Musk is no stranger to a challenge, having led the life of a serial entrepreneur. He and his brother, Kimbal Musk, launched Musk's first start-up in 1995. Musk later co-founded an electronic payment system called X.com, which would be acquired and renamed PayPal. He also founded: in 2002, a rocket development and launch company, Space Exploration Technologies Corporation ("SpaceX"); in 2015, an artificial intelligence research organization, OpenAI Inc.; in 2016, a neurotechnology company, Neuralink Corp.; and, in 2017, a private tunnel-boring company, The Boring Company.

In 2017 through 2018, in addition to his positions at Tesla, Musk was the CEO, CTO, and board chairman of SpaceX and the board co-chair of OpenAI. Musk divided most of his time between SpaceX and Tesla as of June 2017, but he increased the amount of time he spent at Tesla by the end of 2017.

Musk is motivated by ambitious goals, the loftiest of which is to save humanity. Musk fears that artificial intelligence could either reduce humanity to "the equivalent of a house cat" or wipe out the human race entirely. Musk views space colonization as a means to save humanity from this existential threat. Musk seeks to make life "multiplanetary" by colonizing Mars. Reasonable minds can debate the virtues and consequences of longtermist beliefs like those held by Musk, but they are not on trial. What is relevant here is that Musk genuinely holds those beliefs.

Colonizing Mars is an expensive endeavor. Musk believes he has a moral obligation to direct his wealth toward that goal, and Musk views his compensation from Tesla as a means of bankrolling that mission. Musk sees working at Tesla as worthy of his time only if that work generates "additional economic resources . . . that could . . . be applied to making life multi-planetary."

# 1. The Master Plan 

At the time of Musk's initial investment, Tesla was a small-scale startup producing small quantities of a single vehicle: the Tesla "Roadster," a high-end, battery-powered sports car. By 2006, however, Tesla had broadened its goals. That year, then-chairman Musk published on Tesla's blog "The Secret Tesla Motors Master Plan" (a.k.a., the "Master Plan"), which provided a roadmap for Tesla's future. Distilled, Musk's vision was to start by building the Roadster sports car, to use "that money to build an affordable car," to use "that money to build an even more affordable car," and to "provide zero emission electric power generation options" while accomplishing these production milestones. The plan advanced what Musk described as Tesla's "overarching purpose" - to move toward a sustainable energy economy, or, as he wrote at the time, to "expedite the move from a mine-and-burn hydrocarbon economy towards a solar electric economy."

The Master Plan was bold. Although it might seem difficult to believe now, back then, the market for electric vehicles was unproven. Electric-vehicle technology was "described as impossible." Even traditional automotive startups faced an "incredibly challenging" environment in which many failed. In fact, no new domestic car company since Chrysler in the 1920s had achieved financial success. Given the risks, Musk himself viewed the probability of Tesla completing the Master Plan as "extremely unlikely."
[In 2009 the Tesla board granted Musk a stock option compensation plan designed to keep Musk focused on accomplishing the impossible.]

The first part of the 2009 Grant vested automatically in tranches, with 1/4 th vesting immediately and [the remainder] vesting each month over the following three years, assuming that Musk continued to work at Tesla.

The second part of the 2009 Grant was performance based, offering Musk an additional 4% of Tesla's fully diluted shares prior to the grant date for achieving each of [four annual production milestones essential to achieving commercial viability of the Model S.] The 2009 Grant required that Musk meet these milestones within four years; otherwise, he forfeited his right to the unvested portions.

Tesla began delivering its next electric car model, the Model S, in June 2012 and Musk achieved all the 2009 Grant's performance milestones by December 31, 2013.

Before the 2009 Grant milestones had been achieved, on August 1, 2012, the Board approved a second compensation plan for Musk (the "2012 Grant"). The 2012 Grant involved ten tranches, each offering options representing 0.5% of Tesla's outstanding common stock as of August 2012.
For a tranche to vest, Tesla would have to achieve both a market capitalization milestone and an operational milestone. Each tranche required Musk to increase Tesla's market capitalization by $4 billion - an increment greater than Tesla's [then current] $3.2 billion market capitalization. The operational milestones required Tesla to accomplish specified product-related goals, such as developing and launching the Model X and the Model 3, and reaching aggregate production of 300,000 vehicles....

By the end of 2016, Tesla had achieved seven of the market capitalization milestones and five of the operational milestones of the 2012 Grant, with another four operational milestones "considered probable of achievement." By March 2017, seven of the 2012 Grant's ten tranches had vested.

From the Board's perspective, the 2012 Grant was successful. In only five years, Tesla's market capitalization grew by over 15 x from $3.2 billion to $53 billion. Tesla saw significant operational growth as well, designing and launching the Model S, Model X, and Model 3, and increasing its total annual vehicle production from approximately 3,000 total vehicles in 2012 to more than 250,000 vehicles in 2017. Musk worked hard toward these goals. And he was paid extremely well. In the end, the value of Musk's holdings increased from approximately $981 million to $13 billion, meaning that Musk ultimately received approximately 52x the 2012 Grant's grant date fair value.

# 2. The Master Plan, Part Deux 

By 2016, Tesla had reached the final phase of the Master Plan, and Musk began contemplating the next chapter of Tesla's development. In July 2016, he published a new strategic document: "Master Plan, Part Deux" (a.k.a., "Part Deux").

That year, Tesla unveiled a long-range, compact sedan called the "Model 3." Tesla projected that it would begin mass production of the Model 3 in 2017. That endeavor proved the crucible for Tesla. As the company disclosed on March 1, 2017: "Future business depends in large part on our ability to execute on our plans to develop, manufacture, market and sell the Model 3 vehicle . . ." Tesla announced another ambitious deadline, stating that its goal was "to achieve volume production and deliveries of this vehicle in the second half of 2017."

No one thought Tesla could mass produce the Model 3. Musk stated in Part Deux that, "[a]s of 2016, the number of American car companies that haven't gone bankrupt is a grand total of two: Ford and Tesla." Tesla had come close to bankruptcy in its early years. And as of March 2017, approximately 20% of Tesla's total outstanding shares were sold short, making it the most shorted company in U.S. capital markets at that time. Everyone was betting against Tesla and the man at its helm....

## C. [THE 2018 GRANT]

By [2017], Musk had accumulated beneficial ownership of 21.9% of the outstanding shares of Tesla common stock through his early investments and the two prior grants. [The first two compensation plans had served their purpose and Musk now contemplated how his next compensation plan should fit with his and the company's needs as it attempted the next "impossible" feat-the successful development, manufacture, marketing and selling of the Model 3. Any new plan would ultimately require both Board and shareholder approval, but the first step would be development of a plan satisfactory to both Musk and the Board's Compensation Committee.]

The first mention in the record of what would become the 2018 Grant is a text from Ehrenpreis to Musk sent on April 8, 2017. . . . Ehrenpreis asked Musk to discuss "a few comp related issues." They spoke by phone on April 9. Ehrenpreis testified that he had reached out to Musk to see if he was "ready to recommit" and "to figure out . . . was his head in a place that he wanted to recommit over a longer duration to Tesla[?]"

Musk put forward terms of a new compensation plan during the April 9 call. He envisioned a purely performance-based compensation plan, structured like [the 2012 Grant] but with more challenging market capitalization milestones and proposed 15 milestones of $50 billion in market capitalization - a total possible award of 15% of Tesla's outstanding shares.

To put Musk's proposal in perspective, each market capitalization milestone increase of $50 billion required Tesla to grow in size roughly equal to the market capitalizations of each of Tesla, Ford, and GM as of early 2018. So, Tesla would have to grow an amount in market capitalization equal to that of the most significant domestic car manufacturers for Musk to earn a single tranche of compensation. Musk viewed this proposal as "really crazy." . . .
[Following this initial conversation between Compensation Committee Chair Ehrenpreis and Musk, the process that led to the Board's approval of the 2018 Grant began almost immediately. The process came to involve the work of numerous Tesla executives, and outside experts, with Musk, Ehrenpreis, Tesla's General Counsel Todd Maron, and Tesla's CFO Deepak Ahuja serving as the nexus for analyses, conversations and negotiations regarding the desired compensation terms. All told, 13 in-house Tesla executives worked on the 2018 Grant. In addition, the Compensation Committee retained] "Tesla's legal counsel at Wilson Sonsini Goodrich \& Rosati . . . [;] . . . Compensia, Inc., a compensation consulting firm that Tesla had engaged in connection with the 2009 and 2012 Grants [; and another compensation expert,] Jon Burg at Aon Hewitt Radford to value the 2018 Grant in light of the market-based milestones and to advise on the accounting treatment of the 2018 Grant in light of the performance-based milestones. . . .

By June 5, 2017, Tesla had met all ten CEO market capitalization milestones for the 2012 Grant and had only three tranches of operational milestones left to achieve. The Board first discussed the prospect of a new compensation plan for Musk during a June 6, 2017 Board meeting. Musk chaired the meeting. . . . During that meeting, Ehrenpreis updated the Board on the near fulfilment of the 2012 Grant milestones and stated that "plans were underway to design the next compensation program" for Musk. . . .

The Compensation Committee discussed Musk's compensation plan for the first time on June 23, 2017. . . .

During the meeting, Ehrenpreis stated that the Compensation Committee's aim was to create a new compensation plan similar to the 2012 Grant. The committee then set out the goals for the compensation plan in broad strokes. The minutes of the meeting describe that discussion as follows:
The Committee discussed how Mr. Musk had been and would likely remain a key drive of the Company success and its prospects for growth, and that, accordingly, it would be in Tesla's interest, and in the interest of its stockholders, to structure a compensation package that would keep Mr. Musk as the Company's fully engaged CEO. The Committee also discussed the fact that unlike most other Chief Executive Officers Mr. Musk manages multiple successful large companies. The Committee discussed the importance of keeping Mr. Musk focused and deeply involved in the Company's business, and the corresponding need to formulate a compensation package that would best ensure that Mr. Musk focuses his innovation, strategy and leadership on the Company and its mission.

The minutes do not reflect any discussion by the committee concerning the effect of Musk's pre-existing 21.9% equity stake on these goals.

After the June 23 Compensation Committee meeting, Ehrenpreis formed a "Working Group." The group consisted of Maron and at least two in-house attorneys who reported to him (Phillip Chang and Phuong Phillips), Ahuja, Brown, Burg, and attorneys from Wilson Sonsini. Ehrenpreis and Gracias were in the Working Group, but the Compensation Committee decided that the two members with less extensive ties to Musk-Denholm and Buss-were "optional" attendees. . . .
[Thereafter the various internal and external actors worked to produce the 2018 Grant. At times Musk wished to proceed at a faster pace than some key actors thought prudent, but that pace was not implemented. At other times Musk slowed down the process for reasons not totally clear, but possibly related to Tesla's needs. For example, one period of slowed activity on the Grant occurred in August 2017. At that time] Musk remained hyper-focused on Model 3 production, which was proving slow and painful. As Musk described at trial, " [t] he sheer amount of pain required to achieve that goal, there are no words to express." This aspect of Musk's testimony was totally credible. [Despite Musk occasionally shifting his focus away from the planning process, the other actors continued working.

Along the way, Musk suggested, agreed to, or required, depending on who you believe, changes in the compensation plan that appeared to be against his narrow self-interest. These changes could be viewed as evidence of Musk's control, as evidence that he was looking out for the corporation's best interests, or both.

In a key instance, Mush informed Ehrenpreis that he wanted to reduce the possible value of the Grant from 15% of Tesla's stock to 10%, with a corresponding decrease in the number of tranches from 15 to 10 . When informed that this would actually increase the number of shares potentially granted from 25,217,325 to 28,959,456 shares, Musk replied]: "That is more than intended. Let's go with [20,915,000 shares]."

When asked about his December 1 proposal, Musk volunteered an answer that the plaintiff's counsel has gleefully emphasized at every opportunity. He said that the December 1 proposal "was, I guess, me negotiating against myself." . . .

On January 21, 2018, the Board held a special meeting to approve the 2018 Grant. Musk and Kimbal recused themselves and Jurvetson was on leave. The other six directors - Ehrenpreis, Denholm, Gracias, Buss, Murdoch, and Johnson Rice - unanimously approved the 2018 Grant.

In its final form, the 2018 Grant is divided into 12 vesting tranches. Each tranche vests upon satisfaction of one market capitalization milestone and achievement of one operational milestone. The 12 market capitalization milestones increase in $50 billion increments, beginning at $100 billion and ending at $650 billion. The 2018 Grant has 16 operational milestones: eight based on revenue and eight based on adjusted EBITDA. For each tranche to vest, the achievement of any one of the operational milestones can be paired with achievement of any one of the market capitalization milestones. . . .

Each completed tranche earns Musk options to purchase 1% of Tesla's common stock outstanding as of January 19, 2018. . . . If fully vested, the 2018 Grant would therefore grant Musk options to purchase 20,264,042 (pre-split) shares. The strike price of these options was $350.02, the closing price of Tesla's common stock on January 19, 2018. Adjusting for Tesla's two stock splits, the strike price was $23.33. . . .

# H. THE STOCKHOLDERS APPROVE THE GRANT 

Board approval was not the finish line, because the Board conditioned the 2018 Grant on approval by a majority vote of disinterested stockholders. . . . The stockholders approved the Grant at a special stockholder meeting on March 21, 2018, with 73% of votes cast at the meeting (excluding Musk's and Kimbal's ownership) in favor. . . .

The Grant began vesting in 2020 as Tesla's business took off. Although Tesla's business performance between 2018 and 2020 fell short of the March 2018 Projections, Tesla slightly exceeded its projected adjusted EBITDA for 2018. Four tranches vested by the end of 2020, and three more vested the following year. As of April 29, 2022, eleven of the Grant's 12 tranches had vested. As of June 30, 2022, all market capitalization milestones had been achieved, all adjusted EBITDA milestones had been achieved, and three revenue milestones had been achieved, with one more deemed probable of achievement. . . .

## II. Legal Analysis . . .

## A. THE ENTIRE FAIRNESS STANDARD APPLIES BEGAUSE MUSK IS A CONTROLLER. . . .

Plaintiff argues that Delaware's most onerous standard of review, entire fairness, applies because the Grant was a conflicted-controller transaction. Alternatively, Plaintiff argues that entire fairness applies because half of the directors who approved the Grant lacked independence from Musk. Plaintiff wins on the first argument - Musk is a controller. Because Plaintiff wins on the first argument, the court does not address the second argument.

Delaware law imposes fiduciary duties on those who control a corporation. Why? Because fiduciary duties exist in part to minimize agency costs caused by the divide between economic ownership and legal control. Delaware law vests control over a corporation in a board of directors and imposes attendant fiduciary obligations on the board as a consequence. When a controller displaces or neutralizes a board's power to direct corporate action, then the controller assumes fiduciary obligations.
The most straightforward way for a plaintiff to demonstrate control is to show that a defendant holds a mathematical majority of the corporation's voting power. This is so because the DGCL requires stockholder approval of transformational transactions. The DGCL also permits stockholder action by written consent, through which a majority stockholder can remove directors and fill vacancies. "A stockholder who owns a mathematical majority of the corporation's voting power," therefore, "has the ability to exercise affirmative control" by directing the outcome of a stockholder vote or acting by written consent. Musk controlled only 21.9% of Tesla's voting power, so he lacked mathematical voting control.

Mathematical voting control, however, is only one method of establishing controller status. "[C]ontrol of the ballot box is not always dispositive of the controlling stockholder inquiry[.]" A plaintiff can establish controller status by demonstrating that the defendant "exercises control over the business affairs of the corporation." For this purpose, a plaintiff need not argue that the defendant exercised general control over the business and affairs of the corporation. Although a showing of "general control" is sufficient to establish fiduciary status, a plaintiff can establish fiduciary status by demonstrating that the defendant controlled the particular transaction at issue, referred to as "transaction-specific" control.

To establish general control, a plaintiff must show "that a defendant or group of defendants exercised sufficient influence 'that they, as a practical matter, are no differently situated than if they had majority voting control.'" . . .

To establish transaction-specific control, a plaintiff must show that the stockholder "exercise[d] actual control over the board of directors during the course of a particular transaction[.]" This analysis often focuses on relationships "with key managers or advisors who play a critical role in presenting options, providing information, and making recommendations[.]" It can also address "the exercise of contractual rights to channel the corporation into a particular outcome by blocking or restricting other paths," and "commercial relationships," although those factors are less relevant here. Ultimately, "[i]t is impossible to identify or foresee all of the possible sources of influence that could contribute to a finding of actual control over a particular decision."

Both general control and transaction-specific control call for a holistic evaluation of sources of influence. "Rarely (if ever) will any one source of influence or indication of control, standing alone, be sufficient to make the necessary showing." "Different sources of influence that would not support an inference of control if held in isolation may, in the aggregate, support an inference of control." . . .

Here, Plaintiff advances theories of both general and transaction-specific control. To streamline the sprawling set of issues presented, this analysis addresses whether Musk held transaction-specific control with respect to the Grant. Because "[b]roader indicia of effective control also play a role in evaluating whether a defendant exercised actual control over a decision[,]" the sources of influence identified by Plaintiff in support of a finding of general control factor into the transaction-specific analysis. . . .

The analysis begins by discussing Musk's stock ownership, which is a significant but not dispositive indicium of control. The analysis then turns to the factors that play a bigger role in the court's conclusion, which are Musk's influence over managerial decisions, decision makers, and the process. Musk wielded the maximum influence that a manager can wield over a company. His ties to three of the eight directors (Kimbal, Gracias, and Murdoch) rendered those directors beholden to him; with Musk, they comprised half of the Board (given Jurvetson's departure). The rest of the fiduciaries acted beholden to Musk in the process leading to the Grant, allowing Musk to dictate the timing of the process and the terms of the Grant. Ultimately, the key witnesses said it all - they were there to cooperate with Musk, not negotiate against him. This unique suite of allegations makes it undeniable that, with respect to the Grant, Musk controlled Tesla.

# 1. Stock Ownership 

"All else equal, a relatively larger block size should make an inference of actual control more likely[ ]" . . . This is due in part to quorum requirements and stockholder turnout, which give a 40% block holder the same effective power in most circumstances as the holder of a mathematical majority. Meanwhile, "stockholders who oppose the blockholder's position can only prevail by polling votes at supermajority rates." Relatedly, compared to a small blockholder, a large blockholder needs the support of fewer other investors to carry a vote.

Musk wields significant influence over Tesla by virtue of his stock holdings. Just prior to the Board's approval of the Grant, Musk owned approximately 21.9% of Tesla's outstanding common stock. . . .

For Musk, his significant block operated in conjunction with a supermajority voting requirement for any amendment to Tesla's bylaws governing stockholder meetings, directors, indemnification rights, and the supermajority voting requirement itself. Assuming an 80% turn-out, Musk needed the support of less than 10% of the minority stockholders to block a bylaw amendment at a stockholder meeting. By contrast, a proponent would have to garner over 93% of the unaffiliated shares to win. This means that, with the support of insiders or directors, Musk can easily block bylaw amendments that require a supermajority vote. Indeed, Musk has been able to do so two separate times.

Musk's 21.9% block, therefore, gives him a sizable leg-up for stockholder votes generally and the ability to block specific categories of bylaw amendments. The block also gives him great influence in the boardroom. This undoubtedly contributes to his clout and sway.

If this case involved a failed bylaw amendment subject to a supermajority vote, then Musk's stock holdings would likely prove dispositive to the control analysis. But that is not the situation, so Musk's stock holdings must be considered in connection with the other indicia of control.

## 2. Boardroom and Managerial Supremacy

"[T]he ability to exercise outsized influence in the board room[ ]"can contribute to a finding of control. Boardroom influence can come in a variety of forms. An individual might hold "high-status roles like CEO, Chairman, or founder." Or an individual might have other key executive or managerial roles. An individual can wield influence if he can interfere with or kibosh management decisions. An individual will have substantial influence if he can replace management.
Musk wields considerable power in the boardroom by virtue of his high-status roles and managerial supremacy. Indeed, describing Musk's role at Tesla as "highstatus" would be a dramatic understatement. At relevant times, Musk occupied the most powerful trifecta of roles within a corporation-CEO, chair, and founder. He also exercised managerial authority over all aspects of Tesla and often without regard to Board authority, rendering Tesla highly dependent on him. Truly, the avalanche of evidence on this point is so overwhelming that it is burdensome to set out in prose, hence these blunt bullet points:

- Tesla and Musk are intertwined, almost in a Mary Shelley ("You are my creator . . .") sort of way. As Kimbal explained, "Tesla created Elon Musk's persona and Elon Musk's persona is attached to Tesla." Musk is Tesla's public face, and he describes Tesla as "my company."
- Tesla's entire corporate strategy is Musk's brainchild-he conceived both the "Master Plan" and "Master Plan, Part Deux."
- Tesla is highly dependent on Musk, as it has made clear in public disclosures. Musk did not dispute this characterization or that his departure would "likely" cause such disruptions.
- Musk has admitted that he has "the power to direct operational decisions at Tesla[.]"
- Gracias testified that Musk "could have sold the entire company if he wanted to."
- Musk is extremely involved in financial planning and supplies inputs for models and plans. All financial plans must be approved by Musk.
- Musk makes the hiring, compensation, and firing decisions for high-level positions. Tesla employees described Musk as having a reputation among employees as a "tyrant" who fires people "on a whim."
- Musk operates under his own set of rules at Tesla. For example, due to his "special position of trust" at Tesla, no one at Tesla could review his email account without permission except when legally required.
- Musk has made up positions and titles for himself. In 2021, without first consulting with the Board, Musk appointed himself "Technoking"-a position he compared to being a monarch. Ehrenpreis described that decision as "Elon being Elon[,]" which suggests that the behavior is not unusual for Musk. Musk testified that the title was intended as a joke, but that is a problem in itself. Organizational structures, including titles, promote accountability by clarifying responsibilities. They are not a joke.
- Musk operates as if free of Board oversight, as shown by his treatment of the SEC Settlement. Musk's "self-regulat[ory] process for compliance and the Board's desultory enforcement paint a vivid picture of their inability or unwillingness to rein in Musk. Even after the settlement, the Disclosure Committee did not review his tweets. At trial, Denholm was not sure whether the Disclosure Committee was fulfilling its obligations under the SEC Settlement.
- Musk has ignored specific Board directives, such as unilaterally pausing Tesla's acceptance of Bitcoin after the Board approved it. Other surprise announcements include Musk discussing the idea of Tesla repurchasing billions of dollars of stock during an earnings call and without Board knowledge.
- Musk regularly uses Tesla resources to address projects at other companies he owns. For example, after Musk acquired Twitter, he asked approximately 50 Tesla engineers to "volunteer" to help him evaluate Twitter's engineering team. No one on the Board challenged this decision. Murdoch testified that this was "being monitored by the [Audit Committee] and being paid for." But Murdoch was not able to even "ballpark" the number of Tesla engineers involved, even though the monitoring he described had taken place at most "a few weeks" prior to his testimony. Murdoch's testimony also showed that any monitoring by the Audit Committee, such as it was, took place after the fact. Similarly, in 2020, Musk directed Tesla management to send Tesla's "smartest micro grid designer [ ] with a bunch of Powerpacks to [SpaceX][.]"

This evidence, though not exhaustive, demonstrates the scope of Musk's influence as a member of management and in the Boardroom. Based on this list alone, it could be said that Musk wields unusually expansive managerial authority, equaling or even exceeding the imperial CEOs of the 1960s.

One set of scholars have created a term for this sort of person - a "Superstar CEO," defined as an "individual[ ] who directors, investors, and markets believe make a unique contribution to company value." As the authors explain, the reasons for believing that a CEO is uniquely valuable to the corporation might vary, and those beliefs could be wrongly held. But the reasons and their accuracy are irrelevant. "[W]hat matters is only that such a belief does exist."

CEO superstardom is relevant to controller status because the belief in the CEO's singular importance shifts the balance of power between management, the board, and the stockholders. When directors believe a CEO is uniquely critical to the corporation's mission, even independent actors are likely to be unduly deferential. They believe that "letting the CEO go would be harmful to the company and that alienating the CEO might have a similar effect." They "doubt their own judgment and hesitate to question the decisions of their superstar CEO." They view CEO self-dealing as the trade-off for the CEO's value. In essence, Superstar CEO status creates a "distortion field" that interferes with board oversight. As discussed later in this analysis, the distortion field can weaken mechanisms by which stockholders hold fiduciaries accountable, a risk that becomes more severe when the Superstar CEO owns a large block of shares.

Faith in a Superstar CEO changes the dynamics of corporate decision making. That is true for all corporate decisions, but the risk becomes more acute for issues where the Superstar CEO's interests are directly concerned. Nowhere is that truer than the Superstar CEO's compensation. In the face of a Superstar CEO, it is even more imperative than usual for a company to employ robust protections for minority stockholders, such as staunchly independent directors. In this case, Tesla's fiduciaries were not staunchly independent-quite the opposite, as discussed next.

# 3. Relationships with the Board 

A director lacks independence if he or she is "so beholden to an interested director that his or her discretion would be sterilized." Both past and future rewards are relevant to this analysis. The inquiry is "highly fact specific" and there is "no magic formula to find control."

Nine directors served on the Board at relevant times. Jurvetson can be excluded given his early departure. Of the remaining eight, Musk was one and his brother another. That is one fourth of the relevant directors. The other six had varying degrees of ties to Musk. The analysis begins with the four Compensation Committee members (Ehrenpreis, Buss, Denholm, and Gracias) and then turns to Murdoch and Johnson Rice.

Gracias had the most extensive business and personal dealings with Musk and Kimbal. Prior to approving the Grant, Gracias held interests worth over $1 billion in Musk-controlled entities, which Gracias admitted provided him "dynastic or generational wealth." Gracias and Musk had a decades-long relationship, which included joint family vacations and attendance at family birthday parties. Gracias had a 20-year friendship with Kimbal and was an investor in Kimbal's business ventures. Gracias also received millions in Valor investments from Musk and Kimbal, and was a director of SpaceX and SolarCity, the latter until its acquisition by Tesla.

Gracias's business ties to Musk, standing alone, support a finding that Gracias lacked independence from Musk. Similarly, Gracias's personal relationship with Musk, standing alone, support a finding that Gracias lacked independence from Musk. ^9 The combination of business and personal ties make it undeniable that Gracias lacked independence from Musk.

Ehrenpreis also had extensive business and personal relationships with Musk. Prior to the Grant, Ehrenpreis held interests worth at least $75 million in Muskcontrolled companies other than Tesla and had invested in Kimbal's business ventures. Ehrenpreis also had longstanding personal and professional relationships with Musk and Kimbal that Ehrenpreis admitted had a "significant influence" on his professional career. Although Ehrenpreis's relationship with Musk was not as thick as that enjoyed by Gracias, it was weighty. Given the critical role he played as chair of the Compensation Committee, it was too weighty. Even if one could debate whether these ties rendered Ehrenpreis beholden to Musk in general, his actions in connection with the Grant demonstrate that he was beholden for that purpose.

The same is true of Denholm and Buss. Their most significant, potentially comprising factor is the compensation each received as a Tesla director. For Denholm, it was "life-changing." For Buss, it was a large portion of his wealth. Ordinarily, mar-ket-rate compensation does not compromise a director's independence. Outsized director compensation can. But Plaintiff does not argue that Musk established Buss and Denholm's compensation so as to render them beholden. Instead, it is a factor that must be considered when evaluating how Denholm and Buss acted when negotiating the Grant.

The remaining directors present clearer calls. Murdoch lacked independence due to personal connection with Musk. He was a long-time friend of Musk before he joined the Board and they repeatedly vacationed together with their respective families. It was during one such trip that Musk, Kimbal, and Gracias recruited Murdoch to the Board.

Johnson Rice, by contrast, had no compromising personal or business ties to Musk. Plaintiff concedes as much.
Summing it up, it is easy to conclude based on the nature of their relationships with Musk that Kimbal, Gracias, and Murdoch lacked independence from Musk. After Jurvetson's departure, and along with Musk, that was half the Board. The rest of the Director Defendants fall along a spectrum ranging from Ehrenpreis's extensive relationships with Musk to Johnson Rice's lack thereof.

# 4. The Process 

When assessing independence, Delaware courts consider not only the directors' relationships with the party to whom they are allegedly beholden, but also how they acted with respect to that party. Directors with strong ties to a controller may demonstrate their independence. And directors without strong individual ties to a controller may fall victim to a "controlled mindset." A controlled mindset can be evidenced by the directors approaching negotiations seeming "less intent on negotiating with [the controller] and more interested in achieving the result that [the controller] wanted[.]"
... There is no greater evidence of Musk's status as a transaction-specific controller than the Board's posture toward Musk during the process that led to the Grant. Put simply, neither the Compensation Committee nor the Board acted in the best interests of the Company when negotiating Musk's compensation plan. In fact, there is barely any evidence of negotiations at all. Rather than negotiate against Musk with the mindset of a third party, the Compensation Committee worked alongside him, almost as an advisory body.

Multiple aspects of the process reveal Musk's control over it, including the timeline, the absence of negotiations over the magnitude of the Grant or its other terms, and the committee's failure to conduct a benchmarking analysis. In the end, the key witnesses said it all by effectively admitting that they did not view the process as an arm's length negotiation.

## a. Musk Controlled the Timing...

To sum it up, Musk unilaterally set the timeline or made last-minute proposals to the Board prior to six out of the ten Board or Compensation Committee meetings during which the Grant was discussed. Musk dictated when the game clock started and stopped, thereby artificially compressing the work into short bursts that took place when he wished to move forward. Musk's habit of shaking things up just before meetings also made it tough for the committee and its advisors to be prepared. Musk's persistent pattern cannot be chalked up to coincidence. Musk controlled the timing.

## b. There Was No Negotiation over the Size of the Grant

The most striking omission from the process is the absence of any evidence of adversarial negotiations between the Board and Musk concerning the size of the Grant. Musk made an initial proposal, and that proposal was the only one seriously considered until Musk unilaterally changed it six months later.

Defendants did their best to paint a different picture but the contemporaneous evidence betrayed them. They cannot meaningfully deny that Musk made the initial proposal. Although Ehrenpreis initiated the April 9 discussion, Musk proposed the terms during that call. Musk told Ehrenpreis that he wanted a grant with 15 tranches awarding 1% of Tesla's total outstanding shares for each market capitalization increase of $50 billion. This proposal set the size and structure for the Grant until November 9.

Defendants cannot deny that, on November 9, Musk unilaterally lowered his ask.... Defendants tout the reduced proposal of December 1 as a "negotiated price," but Musk was more honest. Unprompted, he described his "proposal on December 1" as "me negotiating against myself." . . .

Defendants emphasize that the Grant ultimately included 12 tranches, each awarding 1% of total outstanding shares and requiring $50 billion in market capitalization growth. According to Defendants, this represented "an appreciation in market capitalization that was $100 billion more than what Musk had proposed in exchange for the same percentage of options." Although Defendants are correct that, all else equal, requiring more market capitalization growth for the same number of shares means a better deal for stockholders, there is simply no credible evidence that the shift from ten tranches to 12 was the result of any actual negotiation with Musk. . . .

The testimony from Ehrenpreis that Defendants cite does not support a finding that negotiations over the 12%/12-tranches occurred. Ehrenpreis simply confirmed that he generally recalled "negotiations in the late part of 2017 about the terms of the" Grant. When asked "[w]hat, if anything happened to the total amount of market capitalization that would accrue to the shareholders if Mr. Musk hit all of the targets in the plan as between the time of the negotiation and then the final plan," Ehrenpreis responded "[d]uring that period of time, the market cap milestones increased by $100 billion." Although this describes what happened, it does not establish the existence of a negotiation. In a follow-up question, Ehrenpreis avoided saying that he or anyone else negotiated with Musk about the market capitalization increase, again merely describing the changes that took place.

Maron also stopped short of describing this aspect of the process as a negotiation. He testified that although the final terms included the "size of the overall plan . . . were all different than I think were initially thought of by Elon. . . . I don't want to say that it was necessarily over his objection. They weren't things he thought of. They were things that the Board thought of and that he ultimately agreed to." Aspects of this testimony ring true-Musk's various proposals lacked the detail necessary to implement them.

In short, the Compensation Committee and the Board failed to negotiate the overall size or difficulty of the Grant with Musk. . . .

# d. There Was No Benchmarking Analysis 

The Grant process lacked a traditional benchmarking analysis, which compares a proposed compensation plan to plans at comparable firms. Benchmarking "provides the compensation committee with a frame of reference with respect to what other companies are doing with respect to compensation[.]" Benchmarking is the foundation of a compensation advisor's analysis. . . .

Defendants proffered reasons for not performing a traditional benchmarking study, but each rang hollow. For starters, Defendants argued that the Board considered "a lot of data that all fit within the overall bucket of benchmarking" throughout the process. The primary evidence is the Compensia presentation from the July 7, 2017 meeting, which included information about other CEOs. . . .

Brown also testified that it would have been difficult to find comparable companies for a benchmarking study. . . .

More telling, Brown took the position that benchmarking was unnecessary because the award would be too large for useful comparison. Brown testified that he had a "really good idea" of what would happen if Compensia performed a traditional benchmarking study, and that "it wasn't going to be useful information for the committee" because the Grant was so divorced from the market for comparable executives. In a similar vein, Defendants argue that benchmarking was not needed because the 2018 Plan was "unprecedented" in that "no other CEO had been willing to condition his compensation on such audacious milestones," especially at a time when a company was struggling. They contend: "Traditional benchmarking is inapt if the companies, executives, and plans are not comparable."

That is a hard sell. As CEO, Musk's job was the same as every other public company CEO: improve earnings and create value. A benchmarking study would have shown the committee what other companies paid for executives to perform that same task. Moreover, the extraordinary nature of the Grant should have made benchmarking more critical, not less. Benchmarking would have informed the decision makers of the magnitude of difference between the Grant and market comparables.

# e. The Key Negotiators Said It All 

In the end, the defense witnesses said it all. Ehrenpreis and Gracias took the lead on the Grant for the Compensation Committee (recall that attendance at Working Group meetings was "optional" for Denholm and Buss). Maron was one of the primary go-betweens. When asked to describe the process, none viewed the process as an arm's length negotiation. Each viewed it is as a form of collaboration with Musk.

Ehrenpreis testified that "during the entire process, there were check-ins with Elon. We were not on different sides of things. We were trying to make sure if we were going to go through this exercise that he was on board."

Gracias explained his understanding of "fairness" in this context and his approach to the process as follows:
[W]hat is important is that [CEOs] feel like they're treated fairly. These plans are about incenting behavior. Behavior is a feeling. It comes from inside the mind. And so we forus on what's fair and what feels fair to people and what's fair to the shareholders, what's fair to us as investors, what's fair to the executives. That's how we think about it. We never engage in these positional negotiations, I want 10 , you want 3 , let's yell about it. That's not how we do things, not how anyone does things.

That is, in lieu of objective market data and arm's length negotiation, the Compensation Committee opted for subjective feelings - "what feels fair." The committee did not take "positional negotiations" against Musk.

Maron described the process similarly: "It was a cooperative, collaborative process. It wasn't acrimonious. So when I say there wasn't a conflict of interest, I think I'm thinking in my own mind was there an actual active conflict between the two parties; and I don't think that there was. I think it was a cooperative collaborative process."
To deal with a conflict, one must first recognize a conflict. "Conflict blindness and its lesser cousin, conflict denial, have long afflicted the financially sophisticated." Maron could not perceive the conflict, much less help deal with it.

The testimony from the key witnesses is perhaps as close to an admission of a controlled mindset as a stockholder-plaintiff will ever get. The Compensation Committee and Musk were not on different sides. They did not acknowledge the existence of a conflict. It was a cooperative and collaborative process. . . .

# C. DEFENDANTS FAILED TO PROVE THAT THE GRANT WAS ENTIRELY FAIR 

Because Musk exercised transaction-specific control over the Grant, entire fairness is the standard of review . . . . Because Defendants failed to show that the stockholder vote was fully informed, they bore the burden of proving entire fairness. . . .

## a. Fair Dealing...

Although Defendants cast the negotiations as the strongest aspect of the process, they are actually the most dramatic failure. Defendants elevate form over substance, proffering what Plaintiff's counsel aptly described as "a false equivalency between length of the process and fairness." Defendants' tallies of time spent are merely "superficial indicia" - total hours spent is meaningless if the time was not used to benefit stockholders.

One important dimension of arm's-length bargaining is the existence of an independent bargaining agent. As this decision has found, the Compensation Committee was compromised by conflicts. They could not negotiate at arm's length against Musk.

Not surprisingly, there is no evidence of any adversarial negotiation with Musk concerning the size of the Grant. Rather, Musk made an initial proposal, and that proposal was the only one seriously considered until Musk unilaterally changed it six months later. . . .

The Compensation Committee's independent advisors cannot help the analysis because they played no role in any negotiations and were not tasked with challenging the committee's thinking or presenting alternatives to the Grant. Defendants agree that benchmarking is standard and essential. They knew benchmarking would expose the Grant as many multiples larger than any conceivable comparison. But the Compensation Committee did not ask its advisors to provide a benchmarking analysis, which would have given them some perspective on how (in Musk's words) "really crazy" the Grant was.

The Compensation Committee relied more on conflicted management members than on its outside advisors. Illustrating this point, many of the documents Defendants cited as proof of a fair process were drafted, pushed out, or endorsed by Musk's divorce-attorney-turned-general-counsel Maron, whose admiration for Musk moved Maron to tears during his deposition.

Suffice it to say, the Compensation Committee operated under a "controlled mindset." Rather than negotiating against Musk, the committee engaged in a "cooperative [and] collaborative" process antithetical to arm's-length bargaining. Worse, the committee seemed to actively advance Musk's interests - doing "what feels fair" for Musk-including by devising ways to understate the Grant's value on the grant date and make the milestones easier to achieve. Those were "exercise[s] in rationalization." In the end, Musk dictated the Grant's terms, and the committee effected those wishes. . . .

# b. Fair Price 

"In the fair price analysis, the court looks at the economic and financial considerations of the transaction to determine if it was substantively fair." "Fair price and fair value standards call for equivalent economic inquiries." "The fair price aspect of the entire fairness test," however, "is not in itself a remedial calculation." "Instead of picking a single number, the court's task is 'to determine whether the transaction price falls within a range of fairness.'" The fair price aspect of the entire fairness standard involves consideration of "all relevant factors" and may encompass "proof of value by any techniques or methods which are generally considered acceptable in the financial community[.]"

There is no absolute limit on the magnitude of a compensation grant that could be considered fair. But "[p]rocess can infect price." And "where the pricing terms of a transaction that is the product of an unfair process cannot be justified by reference to reliable markets or by comparison to substantial and dependable precedent transactions, the burden of persuading the court of the fairness of the terms will be exceptionally difficult."

Defendants[ ] primarily urge the court to evaluate price by comparing the terms of the exchange - what Tesla "gave" against what Tesla "got." This allows Defendants to argue that the Grant was "all upside" for the Tesla stockholders, who they say risked nothing and gave " 6% for $600 billion[.]" There are many alternative ways to analyze price fairness. And there are good reasons to reject the give/get model where no mar-ket-based evidence supports the price. But because Defendants bear the burden of proving fair price, the court starts with their give/get argument.

Defendants' other affirmative arguments go as follows. They argue that a unique set of circumstances warranted an unprecedented Grant, which was "necessary . . . at this time, for this CEO, and in this form." They contend that the Grant was "only upside" for the additional reason that the Grant's structure aligned Musk's interests with the stockholders. They assert that the Grant's milestones were ambitious and difficult to achieve. They maintain that the Grant is an exceptional deal when compared to private equity compensation plans. They say that the stockholder vote was an indicator of fair price. And they insist that the Grant worked by delivering to stockholders all that was promised.

Each of Defendants' fair price arguments fail. Defendants did not prove that the Grant falls within a range of fairness.

## i. The Give/Get

A "get" in this context asks what terms advance a company's goals. A "give" is only reasonable if it is calibrated to further those goals. To contextualize the "give" and the "get" discussion, therefore, the court must first ask: What did Tesla want?

As set out in the June 16 Compensation Committee meeting minutes, the goals in structuring Musk's compensation plan were to "retain[ ]" Musk, "properly incentiviz[e]" Musk, and "[k]eep . . . Musk as the Company's fully-engaged CEO" given the "multiple other successful large companies" he manages. The lawyer-curated record of the relevant Board and Compensation Committee meetings identifies these goals, in general terms, as well as the directors' desires to align Musk's interests with stockholder value. These are all versions of commonly cited and accepted goals of equity-based compensation plans. Here, however, the words seem like empty phrases. One obvious reason to question these statements is that the Board said that it wished to retain Musk as the "fully engaged CEO," yet the Leadership Requirement allowed Musk to step down to the role of "Chief Product Officer." . . .

Equity-based compensation [is] a powerful way to reduce agency costs and align the interests of management with those of the stockholders, as Delaware law recognizes. But where an executive has a sizeable pre-existing equity stake, there is a good argument that the executive's interests are already aligned with those of the stockholders. There are many examples of visionaries with large pre-existing equity holdings foregoing [sic] compensation entirely: Zuckerberg, Bezos, Gates, and others so familiar to the world that no first names are required. In each instance, the CEO's board recognized that the executive's preexisting ownership stake provided sufficient incentive to grow the companies that they had built.

So why not here? Why did Tesla have to "give" anything in these circumstances? Musk owned 21.9% of Tesla at the time of the Grant. If the goals were retention, engagement, and alignment, then Musk's pre-existing equity stake provided a powerful incentive for Musk to stay and grow Tesla's market capitalization. After all, he stood to benefit by over $10 billion for every $50 billion increase. His equity stake was also a powerful incentive to avoid allowing Tesla to fall in what Musk might consider to be incapable hands. Moreover, Musk was not going anywhere. He stated publicly at the outset of the process and repeated throughout this litigation that he was a lifer who intended to stay at Tesla for the remainder of his days (or until he becomes "too crazy"), with or without the Grant.

The principal defect with Defendants' give/get argument (indeed, their fair price argument as a whole) is that it does not address the $55.8 billion question: Given Musk's pre-existing equity stake, was the Grant within the range of reasonable approaches to achieve the Board's purported goals? Or, at a minimum, could the Board have accomplished its goals with less, and would Musk have taken it?

Defendants' primary response is to reduce the issue to a straw man, stating that "Plaintiff's allegations boil down to the position that Musk should be happy to work for free." They make a similar point elsewhere, stating that if Musk "fell short of achieving some or all of the [Grant's] milestones, the stockholders retained the benefit of any increase in Tesla's stock price, while Musk risked receiving nothing." For free? Receive nothing? Defendants' arguments ignore the obvious: Musk stood to gain considerably from achieving the Grant's market capitalization milestones (over $10 billion for each $50 billion increase in market capitalization).

Defendants also neglect the magnitude of the give in their give/get argument. The Grant was, by Compensia's reckoning, the "larg[est] compensation opportunity to [a] CEO that [they] have seen." Even other "highly leveraged plan designs with very aggressive performance requirements" did not compare to the Grant. The Grant was more than 30x greater than its nearest comparable plan, and that was Musk's 2012 Grant. ISS noted that the Grant was 250x greater than the median peer 2017
CEO compensation. The incredible size of the biggest compensation plan ever-an unfathomable sum - seems to have been calibrated to help Musk achieve what he believed would make "a good future for humanity."

A good future for humanity is a really good thing. Some might question whether colonizing Mars is the logical next step. But, in all events, that "get" had no relation to Tesla's goals with the compensation plan. Considering this glaring defect in Defendants' give/get argument, it does not support a finding of fair price.

# ii. The Unique Circumstances and CEO 

Defendants next argue that the Grant was suited for "this time" and "this CEO." To support that argument, they advance the following factual narrative. Tesla was setting an ambitious course-to become "one of the most valuable companies in the world" and "accomplish[ ] Tesla's mission of accelerating the world's transition to sustainable energy." Tesla's ambitious goals forced it to the point of an existential crisis in 2017, and Musk was critical to Tesla's future. Musk was on the verge of walking away and was distracted by his other ventures. Musk required an "added incentive" to stay "at the helm," and he is uniquely motivated by highly ambitious goals. As Gracias explained, the Board looked to fashion milestones that would give Musk the "dopamine hits" he needed.

There is no doubt that "this time" was precarious at Tesla, that the Board viewed "this CEO" as critical to Tesla's success, that Musk is a unique person who has been singularly instrumental to Tesla, and that Musk is genuinely motivated by highly ambitious goals. But there are reasons to question other aspects of Defendants' factual narrative. For example, if transformative growth is the goal, then why set milestones at the time of the Grant that were 70% likely to be achieved? Even assuming that the 70% figure was a conservative accounting metric, it casts some doubt on the "stretch" nature of the early milestones. Further, how can one conclude that Musk was on the verge of walking away from a leadership role at Tesla when Musk made it clear that he "would not quit Tesla," is "heavily invested in Tesla, both financially and emotionally, and views Tesla as part of his family[?]"

Defendants also argue that Musk needed additional incentives to stay on at Tesla or he would spend more time at SpaceX, where he could fulfill his galactic ambitions to establish interplanetary travel, colonize Mars, and potentially earn more money in the meantime. That argument begs another question: if encouraging Musk to prioritize Tesla over his other ventures was so important, why not place guardrails on how much time or energy Musk had to put into Tesla?

Even assuming the truth of all of Defendants' points, they do not add up. There is simply no evidence that the "added incentive" provided by a Grant of this magnitude was necessary, much less fair. This unique circumstance and this unique CEO do not support a finding of fair price.

## iii. The "Only Upside" Argument

Defendants "only upside" argument relics on the Grant's structure, which they say ensured that Musk drove meaningful and sustained growth in four ways. . . .

Fourth, Defendants argue that the Five-Year Hold Period served stockholder interests. At trial, Ehrenpreis described the Five-Year Hold Period as a negotiated term. Musk similarly testified that the Board "pushed" for this term, which was his "biggest concern, because it would mean that either [he] would need to run the company for another five years after the stock vested or [he] would need to find someone who would run the company well enough to not cause the valuation to subsequently decline significantly. . . . A lot can happen in five years." Defendants state that "[w]hile every other stockholder could have cashed in during the nearly 400 trading days that Tesla's market capitalization was over $650 billion, Musk was unable to sell a single share of the compensation he earned under the 2018 [Grant]." This is true. But it ignores that there was no limit to Musk's ability to sell any of the millions of Tesla shares he already owned.

Certainly, the structural provisions on which Defendants rely have value. But that value is limited as to each provision. Given the other defects in the Grant, these provisions do not individually or in the aggregate lead to a finding of fair price. . . .

# vi. The Stockholder Vote 

Defendants argue that disinterested stockholder approval is "compelling evidence" that the price was fair. The stockholder vote is one component of the fair price analysis, but whether the vote represents a form of market evidence that can support a certain price depends on the sufficiency of the disclosure. Generally, a stockholder vote is only "compelling evidence" of fairness absent a disclosure violation. . . .

Because the stockholder vote was not fully informed, it does not support a finding of fair price.

## vii. The Hindsight Defense

Defendants finally argue from hindsight. They claim the Grant was fair because it worked: "Tesla thrived because of the 2018 Plan." With this argument, Defendants ask the court to infer a direct causal relationship between the Grant and Tesla's subsequent performance. But Defendants failed to prove that Musk's less-than-full time efforts for Tesla were solely or directly responsible for Tesla's recent growth, or that the Grant was solely or directly responsible for Musk's efforts. . . .

## D. RESCISSION IS A REASONABLE AND APPROPRIATE REMEDY . . .

## 2. Rescission Is Warranted

. . . The remedy of rescission "restore[s] the parties substantially to the position which they occupied before making the contract." "Rescission 'is not given for every serious mistake and it is neither given nor withheld automatically, but is awarded as a matter of judgment.'" The court has broad discretion to award recission [sic] where the facts and circumstances warrant. This court has awarded rescission as a remedy for breach of fiduciary duty, particularly in the context of self-dealing transactions. . . .

Plaintiff has demonstrated that rescission is reasonable, appropriate, and practicable. This Grant is not "too complex to unscramble[.]" Rescission is uniquely available: no third-party interests are implicated, the entire Grant sits unexercised and undisturbed, and exercised shares would be subject to the Five-Year Hold Period.
Defendants argue that rescission is a harsh consequence that would leave Musk uncompensated. But Musk's preexisting equity stake provided him tens of billions of dollars for his efforts. And Defendants have not offered a viable alternative short of leaving the Grant intact. . . .

# NOTES AND QUESTIONS 

1. The Tornetta court's decision to rescind Musk's pay package sent shockwaves through corporate America, and many commentators questioned the decision to fully rescind the grant. Nonetheless, Professor Holger Spamann explained that this result should have been expected: "Procedurally, Chancellor McCormick could hardly have ruled otherwise because Mr. Musk's lawyers never asked for anything but an all-ornothing decision. In any event, full rescission is the accepted remedy under foundational precedents such as Guth v. Loft (Del. 1939). And for good reason. To be sure, Mr. Musk oversaw Tesla's spectacular rise to a trillion-dollar company and will get nothing for it if he forfeits his compensation. Tesla shareholders will get to have their cake and eat it too. But consider this. Imagine your broke cousin gains access to your bank accounts under false pretenses. Your cousin takes all your money to gamble at an illegal bookie. Your cousin is lucky and doubles the money. Would you be satisfied if the law merely required your cousin to return your money? Or even one and a half times your money? If so, your cousin would be playing "heads I win, tails you lose." As would corporate fiduciaries . . . if the maximum remedy were anything less than full recission." Tornetta v. Musk Is the Rule of Law at Work, Harv. L. Sch. F. on Corp. Governance (Feb. 27, 2024), https://corpgov.law.harvard.edu/2024/02/27 /tornetta-v-musk-is-the-rule-of-law-at-work/.
2. Courts have traditionally been leery of stock option grants because they involve a dilution of other shareholders' percentage of ownership, leading to a two-prong test for determining whether a particular plan is structurally acceptable that is applied when a plan has not been ratified by shareholders:

Delaware law authorizes corporations to issue rights and options in stock. 8 Del. C.  157. However, for a Delaware court to uphold the validity of an option compensation plan, the plan must meet the requirements of a two-prong test: First, the plan must involve an identifiable benefit to the corporation. To that end, the plan must contain conditions, or the circumstances must be such that, the corporation can reasonably expect to obtain that benefit (the "Benefit Prong"). Second, the value of the options must bear a reasonable relationship to the value of the benefit passing to the corporation (the "Value Prong"). . . .
. . Generally, if the independent shareholders have not ratified the plan, then the interested directors have the burden of demonstrating that the plan meets the two-prong test. Alternatively, if the shareholders ratify the option plan, then the challengers must show that the option plan did not represent a fair exchange of value.

Byrne v. Lord, 1995 WL 684868, at *4-5 (Del. Ch. 1995).
As to the Benefit Prong, Delaware law does not require the Court to engage in a "quid pro quo" analysis. Instead, the law recognizes that the benefits to the corporation may be intangible and may not be subject to valuation. For example, corporations may issue options for the purpose of inducing key personnel to either continue their employment with the firm or to expend greater efforts on behalf of the firm. Thus, as long as the corporation expects to receive some benefit from the bargain, the key factor for the Court to consider in determining the validity of the option plan is not whether the corporation can quantify the benefit, but whether the plan itself contains safeguards or circumstances to ensure that the corporation receives the benefit for which it bargained. For example, if by granting stock options the corporation expects that it will retain key personnel, then the plan must provide terms, or circumstances, that ensure that the personnel are employed by the corporation when they exercise the options. The Byrne court solidified this rule, stating:

Thus, in the Kerbs case, the fact that the Directors who voted in favor of the plan were permitted by the plan to leave the company and, yet, have the right to exercise their options for six months thereafter impaled the plan upon the prong of failure to provide reasonable safeguards that the corporation would receive the contemplated benefit, i.e., the retention of the services of the optionee.

Id. at *6.
3. Tesla faced a separate shareholders' suit challenging the compensation of its directors, and settled the case for $735 million in 2023. Modernly, the compensation of non-executive directors has become a significant self-dealing problem. Prior to 1970, the typical corporate board had only a sprinkling of "outside" directors, and the compensation of these outside directors was relatively modest, divided between an annual cash retainer and a fee for attending each meeting. Today, the outside director is usually on a board in which the outsiders make up a substantial majority. As a group, these outside directors have the power to set their own compensation. Moreover, the typical outside director is compensated quite lavishly, with stock options and other equity-based grants often making up more than half of the pay package. According to the Steven Hall Partners annual Executive Compensation Study, the average director at a top-200 corporation (measured by total revenue) received total compensation in 2014 of $276,667, with equity-based grants constituting 57 percent of that total. This represented a 19.6 percent increase over what the average director received in 2009. By 2019, the annual compensation of a director at the largest 200 public companies averaged $315,000. Thus, non-executive director pay is increasing steadily, and at a pace far outpacing inflation.

The common law viewed director self-compensation as a special type of selfdealing, and the standard of review and the cleansing role of shareholder ratification was unclear. In the past decade, Delaware courts have provided increased clarity. In self-dealing transactions not involving a controlling shareholder, shareholder ratification shifts the standard of review from entire fairness to the business judgment rule. See Corwin v. KKR Fin. Holdings LLC, 125 A.3d 304 (Del. 2015); Larkin v. Shah, 2016 WL 4485447, at *10 (Del. Ch. Aug. 25, 2016).
4. When do fiduciary duties attach to controlling shareholders? In January 2024, the Delaware Court of Chancery issued In re Sears Hometown \& Outlet Stores, Inc. Stockholder Litigation, which gave greater clarity on this question. 309 A.3d 474 (Del. Ch. 2024). Sears involved a controlling shareholder that strongly disagreed with the board's plan to liquidate a failing business segment. When the board refused to listen to the controller, he amended the company's bylaws in order to thwart the board's plan. The controller also acted by written consent to remove the two directors that were most supportive of the liquidation plan and replaced them with his affiliates. Because the controller had used his voting power to change the "status quo," the court concluded that he owed a fiduciary duty of loyalty not to "harm the corporation or its minority stockholders intentionally," and a duty of care not to take "grossly negligent action." Unlike directors, who must "act affirmatively to promote the best interests of the corporation," the controller was not precluded by these fiduciary duties from taking selfish action. The court concluded that the controller's actions would be reviewed under enhanced scrutiny-the same standard of review used to review a board's decision to intervene in elections or voting contests (our subject in Chapter 7) - rather than under the entire fairness standard. Because the controller was able to establish that he acted in "good faith for a legitimate objective and had a reasonable basis for believing that action was necessary," the court concluded that he did not breach his fiduciary duties.
5. At the 2024 Tesla annual meeting, a special committee composed of a single independent director, Kathleen Wilson-Thompson, recommended that shareholders vote in favor of two management proposals: "ratifying Elon Musk's compensation under the CEO pay package that [ ] stockholders previously approved at our 2018 special meeting" and "approving moving Tesla's state of incorporation from Delaware to Texas." Telsa Schedule 14A Proxy Statement, https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/ data/1318605/000110465924053333/tm2326076d14_def14a.pdf. Shareholders approved both proposals by a wide margin. Certain large shareholders-including Vanguard and BlackRock - supported the proposals alongside retail shareholders, who turned out in large numbers. Although the parties stipulated that the votes would not affect the pending litigation in Delaware, Tesla's lawyers hoped that the second ratifying vote would quell judicial concerns about whether the pay package was entirely fair. Moreover, the decision to reincorporate in Texas was grounded in a belief that the jurisdiction would help the company avoid shareholder litigation like the suit brought by Richard Tornetta. Are there any limits to a controlling shareholder's decision to reincorporate outside of Delaware? Section 7, below, discusses this issue.


* [Editors' note: Portions of the opinion have been reordered without indication. Any changes to the Court's wording are indicated.