
Although the copyright and patent laws flow from the same constitutional basis and share the same general approach-statutorily created monopolies to foster progressthey feature different elements and rights, reflecting the very different fields of human ingenuity that they seek to encourage. In general, copyrights are easier to secure and last substantially longer than patents, although the scope of protection afforded copyrights is narrower and less absolute than that given to patents.
Copyright law covers the broad range of literary and artistic expression-including books, poetry, song, dance, dramatic works, computer programs, movies, sculpture, and paintings. Ideas themselves are not copyrightable, but the author's particular expression of an idea is protectable. A work must exhibit a modicum of originality and be fixed in a "tangible medium of expression" to receive protection. Copyright protection attaches as soon as a work is fixed. There is no examination by a governmental authority, although the Copyright Office registers copyrightable works. Such registration is no longer required for validity, but U.S. authors must register their works prior to filing an infringement suit. A copyright lasts for the life of the author plus 70 years or a total of 95 years in the case of entity authors.

The breadth and ease of acquisition of copyright protection are balanced by the more limited rights that copyright law confers. Ownership of a valid copyright protects a copyright holder from unauthorized copying, public performance, and display, and it entitles the holder to make derivative works and to control sale and distribution of the work. These rights, however, are limited in a number of ways. Others may make "fair use" of the material in certain circumstances. The Copyright Act also establishes compulsory licensing for musical compositions and cable television. A limited set of moral rights protects against misattribution or destruction of a narrow class of works of visual art.

Copyright law protects only against copying of protected expression. Independent creation of a copyrighted work does not violate the Copyright Act, nor does copying the unprotected elements of a work. Therefore, copyright law must have some mechanism for determining when a work has been copied illegally. While in rare cases direct proof of copying may be available, usually it is not. In its place, courts infer copying from proof that the defendant has had access to the plaintiff's work combined with evidence that the two works are similar. Even if copying is established, it must be further shown that the defendant's work is substantially similar to protected elements (e.g., excluding ideas) of the plaintiff's work.

With the proliferation of digital technology, Congress has augmented traditional copyright protection by prohibiting the circumvention of technical protection measures intended to prevent unauthorized use and distribution of copyrighted works and alteration of copyright management information. These new rights are subject to various exceptions and limitations.
