
UPA (1997) §§ 105, 401, 409
The relationship of fiduciary duty and private ordering is controversial. At one end of the spectrum is the view that fiduciary duty is an immutable feature of partnership law, empowering judges to ensure that partners exercise the utmost honesty, candor, and good faith in deals with, or that affect, the partnership. At the opposite extreme is the view that fiduciary duty is a fully mutable feature of partnership law that must yield to contractual agreements that limit or eliminate a role for ex post judicial intervention. The compromise position, reflected in case law and UPA (1997) §§105 and 409 , views fiduciary duty as partly mutable, but with an irreducible core.

Not uncommonly, a subset of partners will contract for near or absolute discretion in managing the partnership's business. For example, a large law firm may give to a managing partner or an executive committee absolute discretion to set the profit shares of the members of the firm from year to year. Should courts review these self-interested decisions when disgruntled partners assert that the partners with absolute discretion have unfairly favored themselves?

## Starr v. Fordham <br> Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, 1995 <br> 648 N.E.2d 1261

Nolan, Justice.
The plaintiff, Ian M. Starr, was a partner in the Boston law firm Fordham \& Starrett (firm). After the plaintiff withdrew from the firm, he commenced this action to recover amounts to which he claimed that he was entitled under the partnership agreement. The plaintiff also sought damages for breach of fiduciary duty and fraudulent misrepresentation. . . . After a jury-waived trial, a Superior Court judge concluded that [the founding partners, Fordham and Starrett], had violated their fiduciary duties to the plaintiff as well as the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing in the partnership agreement when they determined the plaintiff's share of the firm's profits for 1986. The judge awarded the plaintiff damages of $75,538.48, plus interest from the date on which the plaintiff filed his complaint. . . .

1. Facts. We summarize the judge's findings of fact. In 1984, the plaintiff was a partner in the Boston law firm Foley, Hoag \& Eliot (Foley Hoag). The plaintiff specialized in corporate and business law. Although the plaintiff had become a partner at Foley Hoag in 1982, he was actively seeking to leave the firm in early 1984. During this time, the founding partners were also partners at Foley Hoag. Both men enjoyed outstanding professional reputations among their colleagues. Nevertheless, they agreed that they would withdraw from Foley Hoag in early 1985 in order to establish a new law firm with another established Boston attorney, Frank W. Kilburn. Fordham invited the plaintiff to join the new law firm Kilburn, Fordham \& Starrett in January, 1985. At first, the plaintiff was somewhat hesitant to accept the offer because he was not known as a "rainmaker" (i.e., an attorney responsible for significant client origination) at Foley Hoag. Fordham, however, assured the plaintiff that business origination would not be a significant factor for allocating the profits among the partners. Relying on this representation, the plaintiff withdrew from Foley Hoag on March 1, 1985. The founding partners and another attorney, the defendant Brian W. LeClair, withdrew from Foley Hoag on March 4, 1985.

Prior to executing the partnership agreement, the plaintiff informed Fordham that certain provisions in the agreement disturbed him. The source of the plaintiff's disquiet was Paragraph 1 of the partnership agreement which vested in the founding partners and Kilburn, the authority to determine, both prospectively and retrospectively, each partner's share of the firm's profits. Despite his concern, the plaintiff did not claim at this time that the agreement contradicted Fordham's representations to him that rainmaking would not be a significant factor in distributing the firm's profits. Fordham summarily dismissed the plaintiff's concerns, telling him, in effect, to "take it or leave it." On March 5, 1985, the founding partners, Kilburn, and LeClair each executed the partnership agreement for Kilburn, Fordham \& Starrett. The plaintiff also signed the agreement without objection and without making any revisions. The defendant Barry A. Guryan joined the new firm on March 11, 1985.

In August of 1985, Kilburn withdrew from the firm. Subsequently, the firm assumed the name Fordham \& Starrett. . . .

The founding partners had divided the firm's profits equally among the partners in 1985. Each of the five partners received $11,602. In 1986, the firm's financial fortunes improved significantly. On December 31, 1986, the firm's profits were $1,605,128. In addition, the firm had $1,844,366.59 in accounts receivable and work in progress.

The plaintiff withdrew from the firm on December 31, 1986. The partners remaining in the firm were the founding partners, LeClair, and Guryan. . . . The founding partners determined the plaintiff's share of the firm's profits for 1986 to be 6.3% of the total profits. . . .
3. 1986 profits. . . . The founding partners assert several arguments on appeal from the judge's finding that they violated their fiduciary duties and the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing when they allocated to the plaintiff only 6.3% of the firm's profits for 1986. We address each in turn.

# A. The Burden of Proof 

The founding partners claim that the judge erroneously imposed on them the burden of proving the fairness of their profit distribution to the plaintiff. We disagree.

Partners owe each other a fiduciary duty of the highest degree of good faith and fair dealing. Cardullo v. Landau, 329 Mass. 5, 8, 105 N.E.2d 843 (1952). Shelley v. Smith, 271 Mass. 106, 115, 170 N.E. 826 (1930). When a partner has engaged in selfdealing, that partner has the burden to prove the fairness of his actions and to prove that his actions did not result in harm to the partnership. See Meehan v. Shaughnessy, 404 Mass. 419, 441, 535 N.E.2d 1255 (1989). In the present case, it is clear that the judge concluded that the founding partners had engaged in self-dealing. The judge found that the founding partners' determination of the plaintiff's share of the profits "positioned them on both sides of the transaction" because the percentage of the profits which they had assigned to the plaintiff had a direct impact on their own share of the profits. We cannot say that this conclusion was clearly erroneous. The founding partners were responsible for dividing the partnership's profits and assigning to each partner his respective share of the profits. Thus, the founding partners had some self-interest in designating each partner's respective share of the profits because the percentage of profits which they were assigning to the other partners had a direct effect on their own percentage of the profits. See Sagalyn v. Meekins, Packard \& Wheat, Inc., 290 Mass. 434, 439, 195 N.E. 769 (1935). As a result, we conclude that there was no error in the judge's imposing on the founding partners the burden of proving that their distribution of the firm's profits to the plaintiff was fair and reasonable. See Meehan v. Shaughnessy, supra.

# B. The Business Judgment Rule 

The founding partners argue next that the judge erred in concluding that the business judgment rule does not preclude judicial review of their determination of the plaintiff's share of the 1986 profits. There was no error.

The test to be applied when one partner alleges that another partner has violated his duty of strict faith is whether the allegedly violating partner can demonstrate a legitimate business purpose for his action. See Zimmerman v. Bogoff, 402 Mass. 650, 657, 524 N.E. 2 d 849 (1988). Nevertheless, the business judgment rule does not apply if the plaintiff can demonstrate self-dealing on the part of the allegedly wrongdoing partner. See Johnson v. Witkowski, 30 Mass. App. Ct. 697, 711-712, 573 N.E.2d 513 (1991). Having properly concluded that the founding partners had engaged in self-dealing when they assigned to the plaintiff his share of the profit, the judge made no error in concluding that the business judgment rule did not apply to the founding partners' actions.

## C. Fiduciary Duties and Covenant of Good Faith

The founding partners argue that the judge's conclusion that they had violated both their fiduciary duties and the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing when they allocated only 6.3% of the firm's profits for 1986 to the plaintiff was clearly erroneous. We disagree.

An implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing exists in every contract. See Druker v. Roland Wm. Jutras Assocs., 370 Mass. 383, 385, 348 N.E.2d 763 (1976), quoting Uproar Co. v. National Broadcasting Co., 81 F.2d 373, 377 (1st Cir.), cert. denied, 298 U.S. 670, 56 S. Ct. 835, 80 L. Ed. 1393 (1936). Thus, an unfair determination of a partner's respective share of a partnership's earnings is a breach not only of one's fiduciary duty, see Stratis v. Andreson, 254 Mass. 536, 539, 150 N.E. 832 (1926), but also of the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing. See Druker v. Roland Wm. Jutras Assocs., supra at 385, 348 N.E.2d 763. A court has the power to determine whether a partner's share of the profits is fair and equitable as a matter of law.
Noble v. Joseph Burnett Co., 208 Mass. 75, 82, 94 N.E. 289 (1911). In the present case, the judge "vigorously scrutinized" the founding partners' determination of the plaintiff's share of the profits. See Houle v. Low, 407 Mass. 810, 824, 556 N.E.2d 51 (1990). The judge then made extensive findings concerning the fairness of the plaintiff's share of the profit distribution. The judge found that the plaintiff had produced billable hour and billable dollar amounts that constituted 16.4% and 15%, respectively, of the total billable hour and billable dollar amounts for all of the partners as a group. The judge noted, however, that the founding partners distributed only 6.3% of the firm's 1986 profits to the plaintiff. Meanwhile, the other partners received substantially greater shares of the profits. The judge concluded, therefore, that the founding partners had decided to exclude billable hour and billable dollar totals as a factor in determining compensation. The judge determined that this decision to exclude billable hour figures was unfair to the plaintiff and indicated that the founding partners had selected performance criteria in order to justify the lowest possible payment to the plaintiff. ^1 The judge also noted that Fordham had fabricated a list of negative factors that the founding partners had used in determining the plaintiff's share of the firm's profits. As a result, the judge concluded that the founding partners had violated their respective fiduciary duties to the plaintiff as well as the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing. The judge also concluded that the plaintiff was entitled to 11% of the firm's profits for 1986 and awarded the plaintiff $75,538.48 in damages. ^2

Having examined the record, all 127 exhibits, and the judge's own findings of fact and rulings of law, we conclude that the judge's ultimate finding of liability was not clearly erroneous. We note that " [t] he authority of an appellate court, when reviewing the findings of a judge as well as those of a jury, is circumscribed by the deference it must give to decisions of the trier of fact, who is usually in a superior position to appraise and weigh the evidence. The question for the appellate court under Rule 52 (a) is not whether it would have made the findings the trial court did, but whether 'on the entire evidence [it] is left with the definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been committed.'" First Pa. Mortgage Trust v. Dorchester Sav. Bank, 395 Mass. 614, 621, 481 N.E.2d 1132 (1985), quoting Zenith Radio Corp. v. Hazeltine Research, Inc., 395 U.S. 100, 123, 89 S. Ct. 1562, 1576, 23 L. Ed. 2d 129 (1969). We cannot conclude that the judge committed a mistake in finding that the founding partners had violated both their fiduciary duties to the plaintiff and the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing.

2. The judge found that 11% of the profits was a more accurate reflection of the plaintiff's contribution to the firm's 1986 profits after considering the plaintiff's billable hour and billable dollar totals. In addition, the judge noted that Starrett had recommended that the plaintiff receive an 11% profit share in the fall of 1986 when the plaintiff first had informed his partners of his intention to withdraw from the firm. Eleven percent of the firm's total profits for 1986 amounted to $176,564.08. The judge then subtracted the 6.3% of the profits, which the plaintiff had already received, from $176,564.08 to arrive at $75,538.48.
# NOTES AND QUESTIONS 

1. Should the decision in Starr v. Fordham be the same in a jurisdiction that had adopted the provisions of UPA (1997)?
2. Should the court intervene in cases like Starr v. Fordham only with respect to decisions made after a complaining partner has decided to leave her partnership? Suppose, for example, that a partner is unhappy about profit allocations, but does not want to leave the firm. Should the partner be able to bring suit for breach of fiduciary duty, while continuing in the partnership?
3. To what extent should a partner be able to contract away his right to demand full information about all things affecting the partnership? Consider the following answer:

Under Alaska law, a general partner stands in a fiduciary relationship with the limited partnership and thereby owes "a fiduciary duty . . . to disclose information concerning partnership affairs." Parker v. Northern Mixing Co., 756 P.2d 881, 894 (Alaska 1988); Alaska Stat. § 32.05.150 ("Partners shall provide on demand true and full information of all things affecting the partnership to any partner. . . ."). The partnership agreement, however, will determine the extent of disclosure required between partners and whether a failure of disclosure constitutes fraud or breach of the agreement.
"Partner fiduciary duties are aspects of the 'standard form' of partnership. As with respect to the other rights and duties among the partners, the partners may alter the standard form fiduciary duties to suit their particular relationship." 2 Alan R. Bromberg \& Larry E. Ribstein, Bromberg and Ribstein on Partnership § 6.07(h), at 6:89 (1991); id. §6.06, at 6:67 (arguing that "parties could at least circumscribe the right to information"); id. § 6.05(d), at 6:59 (partners can bargain over access to information).

Courts should allow parties to define the means of disclosure as the management of a partnership necessarily involves "the weighing and balancing of disparate considerations to which the court does not have access." Betz v. Chena Hot Springs Group, 657 P.2d 831, 835 (Alaska 1982).

Exxon Corp. v. Burglin, 4 F.3d 1294, 1299 (5th Cir. 1993).


[^0]: 1. The judge compared the plaintiff's work performance directly to the work performance of the defendants Guryan and LeClair. The judge concluded that the plaintiff's "billable hours by working attorney" were 85% of the total billable hours that Guryan had worked and 77% of the total billable hours that LeClair had worked. The plaintiff's share of the profits, however, was only 34% of the amount which Guryan and LeClair each had received.