
## a. Introduction

The modern era of corporate governance is characterized by shareholder centrality. It features an unprecedented level of shareholder activism and voice. Voting and participation rights now position shareholders to serve as a locus for stakeholder and citizen engagement with corporate management. As John Pound described:

State law provides shareholders with certain voting rights which enable them to resolve disputes with the managers who oversee the corporation on their behalf. As Dean Robert Clark has noted, however, these voting rights are remarkably limited. They extend no further than the power to elect directors and to ratify or reject certain types of corporate combinations and certain provisions in the corporate charter. Moreover, any shareholder wishing to mount a formal challenge to management must pay the freight for organizing and soliciting votes and has only a probabilistic chance of being reimbursed by the corporation. Thus, one could argue that there is little that shareholders can do to monitor management under this framework, except to sit by idly until underperformance reaches intolerable levels. At that point, shareholders are offered the unappealing recourse of organizing a costly and time-consuming proxy contest.

However, if one approaches the voting process from the perspective of democratic political theory rather than through a strict assessment of legal rights, a much different picture emerges. As should be obvious to all Americans, citizens in a democracy have very restricted rights. Nevertheless, voters in a democratic system exert tremendous influence on political actors-not only at election time, but during virtually every moment between elections as well. Voters accomplish this through organizing in political groups which communicate their collective concerns about specific policy choices to elected representatives. . . . Despite the absence of formal options for participation by voters, the system is nevertheless highly responsive to informal actions which are designed to influence policy.

The political model of corporate oversight should be viewed in the same way. The raw power to vote the board out of office is not the nexus of the shareholder oversight process. Rather, the mere existence of this baseline voting entitlement itself allows shareholders to pursue a wide variety of less structured, ongoing forms of monitoring that do not directly revolve around the election of the board. One such monitoring tactic is the initiation of more limited voting challenges, such as a proposal to change corporate governance structure or to elect a single director. A second tactic is informal, between-elections negotiation and lobbying on specific aspects of corporate policy. The existence of baseline electoral power, together with the threat of its regular exercise, create the necessary leverage for these more informal tactics.

John Pound, The Rise of the Political Model of Corporate Governance and Corporate Control, 68 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 1003, 1027-1029 (1993). How can shareholders accomplish this feat? The modern market reality of concentrated and sophisticated institutional investor ownership plays a major role. Consider the following description.

## Institutional Investors in Corporate Governance

Edward B. Rock<br>Oxford Handbook of Corporate Law and Governance ch. 14 (2015)

## Who and What are "Institutional Investors"?

Robert Clark provides a basic framework for understanding how institutional investors fit within the historical evolution of finance. The first stage, characteristic of the nineteenth century, was the age of the promoter-investor-manager, exemplified by Rockefeller or Carnegie. The second stage, characteristic of the first part of the twentieth century, was the age of the professional business manager who took on the management of the corporation, while leaving the financial claims to the owners of shares. This stage was exemplified by managerial giants such as Alfred Sloan who led the way in creating the modern, publicly held business corporation. The third stage, characteristic of the late twentieth century, was the age of the portfolio manager in which the selection of the financial claims (stock, bonds, etc.) was professionalized, while leaving the beneficial ownership to the capital supplier. This age of financial intermediaries is the age of the institutional investors, with great stock pickers like Peter Lynch as representative heroes.

In this age of intermediated finance, the investment function - where to invest money that is being saved - is separated from the savings decision, and given to professionals, the "money managers." By professionalizing the investment function, which had been bundled with the savings decision, the third stage parallels the professionalization of the management function that characterized the second stage of capitalism. The most prominent "traditional" intermediaries are public and private pension funds, mutual funds, insurance companies, and endowments (collectively referred to as "institutional investors"). More recently, as will become apparent later, activist hedge funds have emerged as a distinct category of specialized professional investors. . . .

As is now widely recognized, institutional ownership of equities has been transformed over the last 60 years. In 1950, institutions held $8.7 billion in equities ( 6.1% of total); in 1980, institutions held $436.2 billion in equity ( 18% of total); in 2009, they held $10.239 trillion ( 40.4% of total). In this growth, mutual funds have been especially prominent, going from owning $70 billion in 1980 to $7.2 trillion in 2009. The effect of this growth has been to concentrate ownership of publicly held firms in institutional hands. Between 1987 and 2009, the institutional ownership in the top 1000 US corporations grew from 46.6% to 73%. In 2009, the 25 largest corporations by market value had an average institutional ownership of over 60%. The concentration of ownership within these firms is impressive as well. Table 1 [not included in this excerpt], drawn from data in the 2010 Conference Board report, shows institutional ownership in the 25 largest corporations, and the ownership of the top five, ten, 20, and 25 institutions in each. As this table makes clear, both the level and the concentration of institutional ownership in even the largest companies is high.

When all these factors are brought together, the critical fact that must ground any analysis of corporate governance is the "de-retailization" of the capital markets. Any sensible discussion must begin from the fact that between 60% and 70% of the shares of medium and large public corporations are held by institutional investors, and that even in the largest corporations, a significant percentage of the shares are held by a handful of investors.

# THE GOVERNANCE OF MONEY MANAGERS 

The governance of money managers themselves is quite varied. There are four or five different models, as illustrated by some of the leading firms. First, there are for-profit asset managers, some of which are publicly held (e.g., BlackRock and State Street are both NYSE companies), while others are privately held (e.g., Fidelity Management \& Research Company, which acts as the investment advisor to Fidelity's family of mutual funds). . . .

Second, there are "mutual" and nonprofit management companies. For example, Vanguard's management company is owned by the Vanguard funds, and thus indirectly by Vanguard participants, while CREF, the College Retirement Equity Fund, is a nonprofit corporation whose trustees are directly elected by participants, with votes weighted by dollar amount in an account.

Third, there are public-employee pension funds in which the governing managers or boards are appointed by politicians or directly elected by voters. At CalPERS, the board includes six elected members, three appointed members and four ex officio state officials. The NYCERS board "consists of eleven members: the Mayor's Representative, the City Comptroller, the Public Advocate, the heads of the three unions with the largest number of participating employees, and the five Borough Presidents." By contrast, the NY State \& Local Retirement System is headed by the elected NY State Comptroller.

Finally, there are the union-related funds that have been prominent governance activists. With respect to shareholder proposals, which require minimal investments, the AFL-CIO has filed proposals using its $28 million "Reserve Fund." . . .

Governance structure affects activism in predictable ways. The union funds pursue a labor agenda. The public pension funds respond to political pressure. For-profit money managers such as BlackRock rarely engage in aggressive activism, although increasingly they engage with companies and support dissident shareholders.

# THE ORGANIZATION OF SHARE VOTING BY INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS 

With the thousands of public companies held by institutional investors, each with an annual meeting and a variety of matters to vote on, voting shares is a huge task. Major institutional investors establish dedicated proxy voting departments that are responsible for developing voting guidelines and voting proxies. To get a sense of how proxy voting is organized at major institutional investors, and what sort of people are involved, consider Exxon Mobil's three largest shareholders: BlackRock, State Street, and Vanguard, each of whom owns more than 3% of the company. At BlackRock, for example, there is a "Corporate Governance and Responsible Investment" (CGRI) team that acts as a central clearinghouse across its various portfolios. The CGRI team has 20 professionals working out of six offices around the world, has responsibility for voting proxies, and has developed general Proxy Voting Guidelines. . . .

## THE NEW REALITY: INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS AND ACTIVIST HEDGE FUNDS

... Although traditional institutional investors have not emerged as active "stewards," there has been a more modest, although still important, change in institutional investor behavior: institutional investors are engaging with management in a much more active way than ever before; and, rather than always supporting management, institutional investors are now willing to support hedge funds and other corporate governance activists when they are convinced that doing so will increase firm value. As one hedge fund manager explains, "The brute force of ownership is not required anymore because the big institutional players listen to both sides and are willing to back the activist fund if they believe in them . . You can win with persuasion and ideas." . . .

Hedge funds, in contrast to traditional institutional investors, engage with particular companies over firm-specific issues. Their activities can usefully be divided into corporate governance activism (e.g., pressuring management over business issues such as asking management to spin off a division, nominating a "short slate" of directors, and pushing for changes in corporate financing such as buying back stock or paying a dividend), and corporate control activism (e.g., blocking acquirers from completing a merger, blocking targets from agreeing to a merger, pushing the board to sell the company, and even making bids for the company).

The biggest difference between hedge funds and traditional institutional investors is hedge funds' business model. For traditional institutions, activism, when it occurs, is a response to unexpected and undesired problems that emerge in portfolio companies. Once problems arise, institutional investors must decide whether to sell the position (the "Wall Street Walk"), to intervene to improve it, or to do nothing. [And] institutional investors' incentives to intervene are very weak.

By contrast, for activist hedge funds, activism is ex ante and strategic. Activists first identify a problematic company, then decide whether intervention can improve matters. If activists conclude that an intervention is warranted, they buy a stake in order to intervene. When combined with high-powered performance-based incentives (typically between 1% and 2% of money under management plus between 15% and 20% of gains), hedge funds, unlike traditional institutions, have strong financial incentives to get involved. When an engagement is effective, the gains to the hedge fund can be huge. . . .

The links between activist hedge funds and traditional institutional investors are critical to understanding hedge funds' influence and institutional investors' contemporary roles in corporate governance. [B]ecause activist hedge funds do not have sufficiently large positions to prevail in medium or large cap companies, they must convince the other shareholders - mainly the traditional institutional investors - to support them. Hedge funds play an important "catalyst" role in facilitating shareholder action. . . [This] arrangement allows for a division of labor, with the hedge funds developing expertise in pressuring management. Having induced activism through investments in hedge funds, institutional investors quite reasonably may choose to take a more passive reactive role. . . .

Institutional investors are now far more willing to consider proposals for change made by the activist hedge funds than they used to be. At the same time, hedge funds' high-powered financial incentives create grounds for concern. Hedge funds exist to make money, and will likely attempt to do so, whether or not it benefits shareholders as a group. Thus, for example, hedge funds have sought to acquire companies and, of course, sought to do so at the lowest possible cost. Hedge funds have also used tactics such as "empty voting" that serve the hedge funds' interest at the expense of the other shareholders.

The world has changed when F. William McNabb III, chairman and CEO of Vanguard, publicly salutes certain interventions by activist hedge funds: "The nature of activist investing has changed significantly since the 1980s. Today, we're seeing a greater trend toward constructive activists rather than destructive activists. Activists are not inherently good or bad. They often raise legitimate questions. And when they raise legitimate questions and tie their business cases to long-term shareholder value-that gets our attention."

# NOTES AND QUESTIONS 

1. The excerpt above provides an overview of the cast of institutional shareholders that participate in corporate governance. Activist hedge funds, due to their highpowered financial incentives, tend to be the most proactive in wielding governance rights to drive change at their portfolio companies. They depend on the support of large blockholders and, most notably, the asset managers. As an example of these dynamics in action, consider the 2021 campaign at Exxon Mobil waged by Engine No. 1, an upstart activist hedge fund. In its proxy fight (where a shareholder or group of shareholders attempt to band together to influence a corporate election), Engine No. 1 managed to seat three of its chosen directors while holding only .02 percent of the company's equity, a stunning victory. The key to its success was an emphasis on climate-centric arguments that the fund argued would drive long-term value. This thesis moved the large asset manager blockholders vote in favor of the dissidents and led to massive boardroom change at one of the world's largest oil and gas companies.
2. The institutional investor concentration noted by Edward Rock in the excerpt above has continued. Today, institutional ownership of the U.S. equity market exceeds 80 percent. Much of that growth is attributable to asset managers, and mutual fund blockholders in particular. The four largest asset managers-BlackRock, Vanguard, State Street Global Advisors, and Fidelity-collectively hold more than 20 percent of the U.S. equity market. BlackRock, Vanguard, and State Street are now colloquially referred to as the "Big Three," and wield an enormous amount of raw power.
3. An important market player not mentioned in the above excerpt is the proxy advisor. Proxy advisory firms provide voting advice for institutional investors for a fee. Consider BlackRock as an example. Since the publication of Rock's book chapter, the asset manager has expanded its stewardship group to 60 people, who are charged with "engaging" with 2,500 portfolio companies each year. In 2023, the stewardship group voted on 170,000 management and shareholder proposals. How can 60 people begin to undertake such an enormous task? The answer: they generally defer to proxy advisor guidance for the vast majority of votes.

The two leading proxy advisors are Institutional Shareholder Services (ISS) and Glass Lewis, and their policy choices (as advertised in their annual voting policies) are enormously influential. Often, boards of directors will proactively make changes in response to a proxy advisor recommendation rather than take the risk of a negative vote.
4. The remaining 20 percent of the equity market is held by dispersed individual "retail" shareholders. Rather than purchasing shares through an intermediary, retail shareholders buy and sell securities via traditional or online brokerage firms. They tend to be rationally apathetic when it comes to corporate governance, but they can occasionally be pivotal. Consider the 2024 proxy fight at Disney, a company that has an uncharacteristically high number of retail shareholders - 40 percent of its shareholder base. Both the activist hedge fund, Trian Partners, and Disney took great steps (and spent close to $70 million in aggregate) to motivate retail shareholders to turn out and vote. For example, Disney released an animated video starring Donald Duck's uncle, Professor Ludwig Von Drake, who chided investors: "Voting this year is critical no matter how many or how few shares you may own. . . .Do not vote for the Trian Group [ ] nominees." See "How to Vote" by Ludwig Von Drake, YouTube, https:// www.youtube.com/watch?v=bWAEA_9VUnA.
5. Public pension and union funds also exert ample influence in corporate governance and will often pursue an agenda that is consistent with their political goals. As just one example, the largest public pension fund in the United States, the California Public Employees' Retirement System (CalPERS), targeted Exxon Mobil in 2017 and successfully pushed the company to report on environmental risks associated with climate change. As another example, consider how in 2024, the Strategic Organizing Coalition at Starbucks, a coalition of union funds, waged a proxy fight despite holding $16,000 of Starbucks's $105 billion market capitalization. They argued that board change was necessary to secure better treatment of workers. The company ultimately settled with the coalition and acceded to many of its demands.
6. As you proceed with this chapter, consider how these shareholder campaigns achieved success. What tools do institutional shareholders have to push for change and how do they wield them? How does management oppose change it disfavors? How might you advise a company to manage the risks of shareholder intervention in the modern corporation?

# PROBLEM 3-13 

Search the website of the Council of Institutional Investors at https://www.cii .org/. What set of investors does the Council represent? What are the issues of most concern to the Council? How do they seek to influence corporations and lawmakers?

## PROBLEM 3-14

Search the BlackRock investment stewardship website at https://www.blackrock .com/corporate/ about-us/investment-stewardship. How does BlackRock describe its responsibilities? What are BlackRock's governance priorities?

## PROBLEM 3-15

Search the CalPERS corporate engagement website at https://www.calpers .ca.gov/page/investments/corporate-governance/corporate-engagement. How does CalPERS describe its responsibilities? What initiatives does it advertise? How do they differ from that of BlackRock? Can these differences be explained by their different beneficiaries?
# PROBLEM 3-16 

Peruse the slide deck prepared by Trian Partners in conjunction with its proxy contest at Disney: https://www.slidebook.io/company/trian-partners/presentation /c0aa789673c99e95596853915cdc4823/. How does the company describe the problem and its proposed solutions? Is its thesis compelling?

## b. The Push and Pull of Shareholder Governance in the Public Corporation

## (1) USING SHAREHOLDER PROPOSALS TO AMEND CORPORATE BYLAWS

Although most small-stakes shareholders are rationally uninterested in active participation in corporate governance, institutional and other significant shareholders are well positioned to exercise their governance rights. But there is a limit to what they can do. Continental Securities Co. v. Belmont, 206 N.Y. 7, 16-17, 99 N.E. 138, 141 (1912), contains a classic summary of shareholders' normal governance status:


#### Abstract

As a general rule, stockholders cannot act in relation to the ordinary business of a corporation. The body of stockholders have certain authority conferred by statute which must be exercised to enable the corporation to act in specific cases, but except for certain authority conferred by statute, which is mainly permissive or confirmatory, . . . they have no express power given by statute. They are not by any statute in this state given general power of initiative in corporate affairs. Any action by them relating to the details of the corporate business is necessarily in the form of an assent, request, or recommendation. Recommendations by a body of stockholders can only be enforced through the board of directors, and indirectly by the authority of the stockholders to change the personnel of the directors at a meeting for the election of directors.


Moreover, all corporation codes provide as a general rule that the business and affairs of the corporation are to be conducted by or under the authority of the board of directors.

There remains, however, an important governance tool that is entrusted to shareholders - the power to initiate and, as a body acting by majority rule, amend the corporations' bylaws. Delaware G.C.L Section 109 is typical in providing that "the power to adopt, amend or repeal bylaws shall be in the stockholders entitled to vote." Moreover, the power so granted is framed expansively, extending to "any provision, not inconsistent with law or with the certificate of incorporation, relating to the business of the corporation, the conduct of its affairs, and its rights and powers or the rights and powers of its stockholders, directors, officers or employees."

While it is generally understood that the shareholders cannot use bylaw amendments to actively manage the corporation, the line where shareholder authority ends and directors' exclusive authority begins is murky at best.

In the public company setting, whether shareholders may act by bylaw amendment or not is typically refereed by the SEC. In doing so, however, the SEC is attempting to facilitate, not supplant, state law. The operative vehicle is SEC Rule 14a-8 and the SEC's supervision over which shareholder proposals a corporation may or may not omit from shareholder-meeting proxy materials. Under Rule 14a-8(i) (1), a corporation may choose to omit a shareholder proposal if it "is not a proper subject for action by shareholders under the laws of the jurisdiction of the company's organization." While it may not be obvious from the language of that provision, this exception allows a corporation to omit any proposal which purports, if passed, to be binding upon the corporation. In practice, because shareholders may only initiate binding corporate action via a proposed bylaw amendment, the applicability of this exception depends on whether a shareholder proposal is cast in the form of a proposed bylaw amendment, and, if so, whether the subject of that bylaw amendment can be enacted by shareholders or, instead, is a matter that under governing state law is entrusted exclusively to the directors.

In the following case, the Delaware Supreme Court provides guidance to the SEC and practitioners on what constitutes permissible and impermissible shareholder use of their bylaw-amendment authority. Keep in mind that other jurisdictions may have slightly different statutory schemes that could cause a reviewing court in those jurisdictions to find greater or lesser space for shareholder action, or might interpret a Delaware-similar provision differently than does the Delaware Supreme Court.

# CA, Inc. v. AFSCME Employees Pension Plan <br> Supreme Court of Delaware (en banc), 2008 <br> 953 A.2d 227 

Upon Certification of Questions of Law from the United States Securities and Exchange Commission.

JACOBS, Justice.

## I. FACTS

CA is a Delaware corporation whose board of directors consists of twelve persons, all of whom sit for reelection each year. CA's annual meeting of stockholders is scheduled to be held on September 9, 2008. CA intends to file its definitive proxy materials with the SEC on or about July 24,2008 in connection with that meeting.

AFSCME, a CA stockholder, is associated with the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees. On March 13, 2008, AFSCME submitted a proposed stockholder bylaw (the "Bylaw" or "proposed Bylaw") for inclusion in the Company's proxy materials for its 2008 annual meeting of stockholders. The Bylaw, if adopted by CA stockholders, would amend the Company's bylaws to provide as follows:

RESOLVED, that pursuant to section 109 of the Delaware General Corporation Law and Article IX of the bylaws of CA, Inc., stockholders of CA hereby amend the bylaws to add the following Section 14 to Article II:

The board of directors shall cause the corporation to reimburse a stockholder or group of stockholders (together, the "Nominator") for reasonable expenses ("Expenses") incurred in connection with nominating one or more candidates in a contested election of directors to the corporation's board of directors, including, without limitation, printing, mailing, legal, solicitation, travel, advertising and public relations expenses, so long as (a) the election of fewer than 50% of the directors to be elected is contested in the election, (b) one or more candidates nominated by the Nominator are elected to the corporation's board of directors, (c) stockholders are not permitted to cumulate their votes for directors, and (d) the election occurred, and the Expenses were incurred, after this bylaw's adoption. The amount paid to a Nominator under this bylaw in respect of a contested election shall not exceed the amount expended by the corporation in connection with such election.
CA's current bylaws and Certificate of Incorporation have no provision that specifically addresses the reimbursement of proxy expenses. Of more general relevance, however, is Article SEVENTH, Section (1) of CA's Certificate of Incorporation, which tracks the language of 8 Del. C. § 141 (a) and provides that:

The management of the business and the conduct of the affairs of the corporation shall be vested in [CA's] Board of Directors.

It is undisputed that the decision whether to reimburse election expenses is presently vested in the discretion of CA's board of directors, subject to their fiduciary duties and applicable Delaware law.

On April 18, 2008, CA notified the SEC's Division of Corporation Finance (the "Division") of its intention to exclude the proposed Bylaw from its 2008 proxy materials. The Company requested from the Division a "no-action letter" stating that the Division would not recommend any enforcement action to the SEC if CA excluded the AFSCME proposal. ^2 CA's request for a no-action letter was accompanied by an opinion from its Delaware counsel, Richards Layton \& Finger, P.A. ("RL\&F"). The RL\&F opinion concluded that the proposed Bylaw is not a proper subject for stockholder action, and that if implemented, the Bylaw would violate the Delaware General Corporation Law ("DGCL").

On May 21, 2008, AFSCME responded to CA's no-action request with a letter taking the opposite legal position. The AFSCME letter was accompanied by an opinion from AFSCME's Delaware counsel, Grant \& Eisenhofer, P.A. ("G\&E"). The G\&E opinion concluded that the proposed Bylaw is a proper subject for shareholder action and that if adopted, would be permitted under Delaware law.

The Division was thus confronted with two conflicting legal opinions on Delaware law. Whether or not the Division would determine that CA may exclude the proposed Bylaw from its 2008 proxy materials would depend upon which of these conflicting views is legally correct. To obtain guidance, the SEC, at the Division's request, certified two questions of Delaware law to this Court. Given the short timeframe for the filing of CA's proxy materials, we concluded that "there are important and urgent reasons for an immediate determination of the questions certified," and accepted those questions for review on July 1, 2008.

# II. The Certified Questions 

The two questions certified to us by the SEC are as follows:

1. Is the AFSCME Proposal a proper subject for action by shareholders as a matter of Delaware law?
2. Would the AFSCME Proposal, if adopted, cause CA to violate any Delaware law to which it is subject? . . .
# III. The First Question 

## A. PRELIMINARY COMMENTS

The first question presented is whether the Bylaw is a proper subject for shareholder action, more precisely, whether the Bylaw may be proposed and enacted by shareholders without the concurrence of the Company's board of directors. Before proceeding further, we make some preliminary comments in an effort to delineate a framework within which to begin our analysis.

First, the DGCL empowers both the board of directors and the shareholders of a Delaware corporation to adopt, amend or repeal the corporation's bylaws. 8 Del. C. §109 (a) relevantly provides that:

After a corporation has received any payment for any of its stock, the power to adopt, amend or repeal bylaws shall be in the stockholders entitled to vote . . . ; provided, however, any corporation may, in its certificate of incorporation, confer the power to adopt, amend or repeal bylaws upon the directors. . . The fact that such power has been so conferred upon the directors . . . shall not divest the stockholders . . . of the power, nor limit their power to adopt, amend or repeal bylaws.

Pursuant to Section 109(a), CA's Certificate of Incorporation confers the power to adopt, amend or repeal the bylaws upon the Company's board of directors. Because the statute commands that that conferral "shall not divest the stockholders . . . of ... nor limit" their power, both the board and the shareholders of CA, independently and concurrently, possess the power to adopt, amend and repeal the bylaws.

Second, the vesting of that concurrent power in both the board and the shareholders raises the issue of whether the stockholders' power is coextensive with that of the board, and vice versa. As a purely theoretical matter that is possible, and were that the case, then the first certified question would be easily answered. That is, under such a regime any proposal to adopt, amend or repeal a bylaw would be a proper subject for either shareholder or board action, without distinction. But the DGCL has not allocated to the board and the shareholders the identical, coextensive power to adopt, amend and repeal the bylaws. Therefore, how that power is allocated between those two decision-making bodies requires an analysis that is more complex.

Moving from the theoretical to this case, by its terms Section 109(a) vests in the shareholders a power to adopt, amend or repeal bylaws that is legally sacrosanct, i.e., the power cannot be non-consensually eliminated or limited by anyone other than the legislature itself. If viewed in isolation, Section 109(a) could be read to make the board's and the shareholders' power to adopt, amend or repeal bylaws identical and coextensive, but Section 109(a) does not exist in a vacuum. It must be read together with 8 Del. C. § 141 (a), which pertinently provides that:

The business and affairs of every corporation organized under this chapter shall be managed by or under the direction of a board of directors, except as may be otherwise provided in this chapter or in its certificate of incorporation.

No such broad management power is statutorily allocated to the shareholders. Indeed, it is well-established that stockholders of a corporation subject to the DGCL.
may not directly manage the business and affairs of the corporation, at least without specific authorization in either the statute or the certificate of incorporation. Therefore, the shareholders' statutory power to adopt, amend or repeal bylaws is not coextensive with the board's concurrent power and is limited by the board's management prerogatives under Section 141 (a).

Third, it follows that, to decide whether the Bylaw proposed by AFSCME is a proper subject for shareholder action under Delaware law, we must first determine: (1) the scope or reach of the shareholders' power to adopt, alter or repeal the bylaws of a Delaware corporation, and then (2) whether the Bylaw at issue here falls within that permissible scope. Where, as here, the proposed bylaw is one that limits director authority, that is an elusively difficult task. As one noted scholar has put it, "the efforts to distinguish by-laws that permissibly limit director authority from by-laws that impermissibly do so have failed to provide a coherent analytical structure, and the pertinent statutes provide no guidelines for distinction at all." ^8 The tools that are available to this Court to answer those questions are other provisions of the DGCL and Delaware judicial decisions that can be brought to bear on this question.

# B. ANALYSIS 

## 1.

Two other provisions of the DGCL, 8 Del. C. §§109 (b) and 102(b) (1), bear importantly on the first question and form the basis of contentions advanced by each side. Section 109 (b), which deals generally with bylaws and what they must or may contain, provides that:

The bylaws may contain any provision, not inconsistent with law or with the certificate of incorporation, relating to the business of the corporation, the conduct of its affairs, and its rights or powers or the rights or powers of its stockholders, directors, officers or employees.

And Section 102(b) (1), which is part of a broader provision that addresses what the certificate of incorporation must or may contain, relevantly states that:
(b) In addition to the matters required to be set forth in the certificate of incorporation by subsection (a) of this section, the certificate of incorporation may also contain any or all of the following matters:
(1) Any provision for the management of the business and for the conduct of the affairs of the corporation, and any provision creating, defining, limiting and regulating the powers of the corporation, the directors and the stockholders, or any class of the stockholders . . . ; if such provisions are not contrary to the laws of this State. Any provision which is required or permitted by any section of this chapter to be stated in the bylaws may instead be stated in the certificate of incorporation.

AFSCME relies heavily upon the language of Section 109(b), which permits the bylaws of a corporation to contain "any provision . . . relating to the . . . rights or powers of its stockholders [and] directors. . . ." The Bylaw, AFSCME argues, "relates to" the right of the stockholders meaningfully to participate in the process of electing directors, a right that necessarily "includes the right to nominate an opposing slate."

CA argues, in response, that Section 109 (b) is not dispositive, because it cannot be read in isolation from, and without regard to, Section 102(b) (1). CA's argument runs as follows: the Bylaw would limit the substantive decision-making authority of CA's board to decide whether or not to expend corporate funds for a particular purpose, here, reimbursing director election expenses. Section 102(b) (1) contemplates that any provision that limits the broad statutory power of the directors must be contained in the certificate of incorporation. Therefore, the proposed Bylaw can only be in CA's Certificate of Incorporation, as distinguished from its bylaws. Accordingly, the proposed bylaw falls outside the universe of permissible bylaws authorized by Section 109(b).

Implicit in CA's argument is the premise that any bylaw that in any respect might be viewed as limiting or restricting the power of the board of directors automatically falls outside the scope of permissible bylaws. That simply cannot be. That reasoning, taken to its logical extreme, would result in eliminating altogether the shareholders' statutory right to adopt, amend or repeal bylaws. Bylaws, by their very nature, set down rules and procedures that bind a corporation's board and its shareholders. In that sense, most, if not all, bylaws could be said to limit the otherwise unlimited discretionary power of the board. Yet Section 109(a) carves out an area of shareholder power to adopt, amend or repeal bylaws that is expressly inviolate. Therefore, to argue that the Bylaw at issue here limits the board's power to manage the business and affairs of the Company only begins, but cannot end, the analysis needed to decide whether the Bylaw is a proper subject for shareholder action. The question left unanswered is what is the scope of shareholder action that Section 109(b) permits yet does not improperly intrude upon the directors' power to manage corporation's business and affairs under Section 141 (a).

It is at this juncture that the statutory language becomes only marginally helpful in determining what the Delaware legislature intended to be the lawful scope of the shareholders' power to adopt, amend and repeal bylaws. To resolve that issue, the Court must resort to different tools, namely, decisions of this Court and of the Court of Chancery that bear on this question. Those tools do not enable us to articulate with doctrinal exactitude a bright line that divides those bylaws that shareholders may unilaterally adopt under Section 109(b) from those which they may not under Section 141 (a). They do, however, enable us to decide the issue presented in this specific case. ^14

# 2. 

It is well-established Delaware law that a proper function of bylaws is not to mandate how the board should decide specific substantive business decisions, but rather, to define the process and procedures by which those decisions are made. As the Court of Chancery has noted:

Traditionally, the bylaws have been the corporate instrument used to set forth the rules by which the corporate board conducts its business. To this end, the DGCL is replete with specific provisions authorizing the bylaws to establish the procedures through which board and committee action is taken. . . [T]here is a general consensus that bylaws that regulate the process by which the board acts are statutorily authorized. ^15...
. . . I reject International's argument that that provision in the Bylaw Amendments impermissibly interferes with the board's authority under §141 (a) to manage the business and affairs of the corporation. Sections 109 and 141, taken in totality, . . . make clear that bylaws may pervasively and strictly regulate the process by which boards act, subject to the constraints of equity. ^16

Examples of the procedural, process-oriented nature of bylaws are found in both the DGCL and the case law. For example, 8 Del. C. § 141 (b) authorizes bylaws that fix the number of directors on the board, the number of directors required for a quorum (with certain limitations), and the vote requirements for board action. 8 Del. C. §141 (f) authorizes bylaws that preclude board action without a meeting. And, almost three decades ago this Court upheld a shareholder-enacted bylaw requiring unanimous board attendance and board approval for any board action, and unanimous ratification of any committee action. Such purely procedural bylaws do not improperly encroach upon the board's managerial authority under Section 141 (a).

The process-creating function of bylaws provides a starting point to address the Bylaw at issue. It enables us to frame the issue in terms of whether the Bylaw is one that establishes or regulates a process for substantive director decision-making, or one that mandates the decision itself. Not surprisingly, the parties sharply divide on that question. We conclude that the Bylaw, even though infelicitously couched as a sub-stantive-sounding mandate to expend corporate funds, has both the intent and the effect of regulating the process for electing directors of CA. Therefore, we determine that the Bylaw is a proper subject for shareholder action, and set forth our reasoning below.

Although CA concedes that "restrictive procedural bylaws (such as those requiring the presence of all directors and unanimous board consent to take action) are acceptable," it points out that even facially procedural bylaws can unduly intrude upon board authority. The Bylaw being proposed here is unduly intrusive, CA claims, because, by mandating reimbursement of a stockholder's proxy expenses, it limits the board's broad discretionary authority to decide whether to grant reimbursement at all. CA further claims that because (in defined circumstances) the Bylaw mandates 16. Id. at 1080 n. 136 .
the expenditure of corporate funds, its subject matter is necessarily substantive, not process-oriented, and, therefore falls outside the scope of what Section 109(b) permits. ^19

Because the Bylaw is couched as a command to reimburse ("The board of directors shall cause the corporation to reimburse a stockholder"), it lends itself to CA's criticism. But the Bylaw's wording, although relevant, is not dispositive of whether or not it is process-related. The Bylaw could easily have been worded differently, to emphasize its process, as distinguished from its mandatory payment, component. ^20 By saying this we do not mean to suggest that this Bylaw's reimbursement component can be ignored. What we do suggest is that a bylaw that requires the expenditure of corporate funds does not, for that reason alone, become automatically deprived of its process-related character. A hypothetical example illustrates the point. Suppose that the directors of a corporation live in different states and at a considerable distance from the corporation's headquarters. Suppose also that the shareholders enact a bylaw that requires all meetings of directors to take place in person at the corporation's headquarters. Such a bylaw would be clearly process-related, yet it cannot be supposed that the shareholders would lack the power to adopt the bylaw because it would require the corporation to expend its funds to reimburse the directors' travel expenses. Whether or not a bylaw is process-related must necessarily be determined in light of its context and purpose.

The context of the Bylaw at issue here is the process for electing directors-a subject in which shareholders of Delaware corporations have a legitimate and protected interest. ^21 The purpose of the Bylaw is to promote the integrity of that electoral process by facilitating the nomination of director candidates by stockholders or groups 19. CA actually conflates two separate arguments that, although facially similar, are analytically distinct. The first argument is that the Bylaw impermissibly intrudes upon board authority because it mandates the expenditure of corporate funds. The second is that the Bylaw impermissibly leaves no role for board discretion and would require reimbursement of the costs of a subset of CA's stockholders, even in circumstances where the board's fiduciary duties would counsel otherwise. Analytically, the first argument is relevant to the issue of whether the Bylaw is a proper subject for unilateral stockholder action, whereas the second argument more properly goes to the separate question of whether the Bylaw, if enacted, would violate Delaware law.
20. For example, the Bylaw could have been phrased more benignly, to provide that "[a] stockholder or group of stockholders (together, the 'Nominator') shall be entitled to reimbursement from the corporation for reasonable expenses ('Expenses') incurred in connection with nominating one or more candidates in a contested election of directors to the corporation's board of directors in the following circumstances. . . ." Although the substance of the Bylaw would be no different, the emphasis would be upon the shareholders' entitlement to reimbursement, rather than upon the directors' obligation to reimburse. As discussed in Part IV, infra, of this Opinion, in order for the Bylaw not to be "not inconsistent with law" as Section 109(b) mandates, it would also need to contain a provision that reserves the directors' full power to discharge their fiduciary duties.
21. Blasius Indus., Inc. v. Atlas Corp., 564 A.2d 651, 660 n. 2 (Del. Ch. 1988) ("Delaware courts have long exercised a most sensitive and protective regard for the free and effective exercise of voting rights"); Id. at 659 ("[W]hen viewed from a broad, institutional perspective, it can be seen that matters involving the integrity of the shareholder voting process involve consideration[s] not present in any other context in which directors exercise delegated power"). See also Unitrin, Inc. v. Am. Gen. Corp., 651 A.2d 1361, 1378 (Del. 1995); MM Cos., Inc. v. Liquid Audio, Inc., 813 A.2d 1118 (Del. 2003); and 8 Del. C. § 211 (authorizing a shareholder to petition the Court of Chancery to order a meeting of stockholders to elect directors where such a meeting has not been held for at least 13 months).
of stockholders. Generally, and under the current framework for electing directors in contested elections, only board-sponsored nominees for election are reimbursed for their election expenses. Dissident candidates are not, unless they succeed in replacing at least a majority of the entire board. The Bylaw would encourage the nomination of non-management board candidates by promising reimbursement of the nominating stockholders' proxy expenses if one or more of its candidates are elected. In that the shareholders also have a legitimate interest, because the Bylaw would facilitate the exercise of their right to participate in selecting the contestants. The Court of Chancery has so recognized:
[T]he unadorned right to cast a ballot in a contest for [corporate] office . . . is meaningless without the right to participate in selecting the contestants. As the nominating process circumscribes the range of choice to be made, it is a fundamental and outcome-determinative step in the election of officeholders. To allow for voting while maintaining a closed selection process thus renders the former an empty exercise. ^22
. . . The shareholders of a Delaware corporation have the right "to participate in selecting the contestants" for election to the board. The shareholders are entitled to facilitate the exercise of that right by proposing a bylaw that would encourage candidates other than board-sponsored nominees to stand for election. The Bylaw would accomplish that by committing the corporation to reimburse the election expenses of shareholders whose candidates are successfully elected. That the implementation of that proposal would require the expenditure of corporate funds will not, in and of itself, make such a bylaw an improper subject matter for shareholder action. Accordingly, we answer the first question certified to us in the affirmative.

That, however, concludes only part of the analysis. The DGCL also requires that the Bylaw be "not inconsistent with law." ^23 Accordingly, we turn to the second certified question, which is whether the proposed Bylaw, if adopted, would cause CA to violate any Delaware law to which it is subject.

# IV. The Second Question 

In answering the first question, we have already determined that the Bylaw does not facially violate any provision of the DGCL or of CA's Certificate of Incorporation. The question thus becomes whether the Bylaw would violate any common law rule or precept. Were this issue being presented in the course of litigation involving the application of the Bylaw to a specific set of facts, we would start with the presumption that the Bylaw is valid and, if possible, construe it in a manner consistent with the law. The factual context in which the Bylaw was challenged would inform our analysis, and we would "exercise caution [before] invalidating corporate acts based upon hypothetical injuries. . . ." The certified questions, however, request a determination of the 23. 8 Del. C. $109 (b).
validity of the Bylaw in the abstract. Therefore, in response to the second question, we must necessarily consider any possible circumstance under which a board of directors might be required to act. Under at least one such hypothetical, the board of directors would breach their fiduciary duties if they complied with the Bylaw. Accordingly, we conclude that the Bylaw, as drafted, would violate the prohibition, which our decisions have derived from Section 141 (a), against contractual arrangements that commit the board of directors to a course of action that would preclude them from fully discharging their fiduciary duties to the corporation and its shareholders. . . .

This case involves a binding bylaw that the shareholders seek to impose involuntarily on the directors in the specific area of election expense reimbursement. . . . [T]he internal governance contract-which here takes the form of a bylaw-is one that would also prevent the directors from exercising their full managerial power in circumstances where their fiduciary duties would otherwise require them to deny reimbursement to a dissident slate. That this limitation would be imposed by a majority vote of the shareholders rather than by the directors themselves, does not, in our view, legally matter. ^32.. . .

It is in this respect that the proposed Bylaw, as written, would violate Delaware law if enacted by CA's shareholders. As presently drafted, the Bylaw would afford CA's directors full discretion to determine what amount of reimbursement is appropriate, because the directors would be obligated to grant only the "reasonable" expenses of a successful short slate. Unfortunately, that does not go far enough, because the Bylaw contains no language or provision that would reserve to CA's directors their full power to exercise their fiduciary duty to decide whether or not it would be appropriate, in a specific case, to award reimbursement at all. ^35
. . . In arriving at this conclusion, we express no view on whether the Bylaw as currently drafted, would create a better governance scheme from a policy standpoint. We decide only what is, and is not, legally permitted under the DGCL. That statute, as currently drafted, is the expression of policy as decreed by the Delaware legislature. Those who believe that CA's shareholders should be permitted to make the proposed Bylaw as drafted part of CA's governance scheme, have two alternatives. They may seek to amend the Certificate of Incorporation to include the substance of the Bylaw; or they may seek recourse from the Delaware General Assembly.

Accordingly, we answer the second question certified to us in the affirmative.

# NOTES AND QUESTIONS 

1. The two parts of the CA opinion leave ambiguity as to the reach of shareholder power to amend the bylaws. Following this case, the Delaware legislature in April 33. See Malone v. Brincat, 722 A.2d 5, 10 (Del. 1998) ("Although the fiduciary duty of a Delaware director is unremitting, the exact course of conduct that must be charted to properly discharge that responsibility will change in the specific context of the action the director is taking with regard to either the corporation or its shareholders"). A decision by directors to deny reimbursement on fiduciary grounds would be judicially reviewable.
2009 addressed shareholder nominations and reimbursement for proxy expenses as a proper subject for bylaws by enacting new sections 112 and 113 to the Delaware G.C.L., specifying that the bylaws can include provisions requiring the firm's proxy and proxy solicitation to include individuals nominated by shareholders (Section 112) and providing for the reimbursement by the corporation of expenses incurred in connection with the election of directors (Section 113). The statute is not mandatory for Delaware corporations but rather is an enabling statute that permits each corporation to shape the provisions to its own needs. The statute includes a list of procedures or conditions that may be included.
2. Not to be left behind, the ABA Committee on Corporate Laws proposed in June 2009 and adopted in October 2009 amendments to the MBCA § 2.06 that authorized both shareholder expense reimbursement bylaws and shareholder proxy access bylaws.
3. The court in note 32 says the distinction between shareholder and director action would be dispositive if the bylaw were enacted as an amendment to the certificate of incorporation (referred to in other states as the articles of incorporation or the charter). Is such a provision likely to make its way into the certificate? Why or why not?
4. The CA case involved a proposed bylaw that would have required the company to reimburse expenses reasonably incurred by shareholders in an electoral challenge to incumbent directors. The effect of such a bylaw is to make it less costly for shareholders to wage proxy contests. But other controversial director-enacted bylaws have sought to limit shareholder powers and rights. For example, fee-shifting bylaws require plaintiff shareholders to bear litigation expenses if they fail to receive a judgment on the merits. Such bylaws were adopted by companies in the years following the financial crisis, when shareholder lawsuits became more frequent. Proponents of fee-shifting bylaws argued that they would deter frivolous litigation; opponents argued that they would make it harder for shareholders to prevent managerial misconduct. Fee-shifting bylaws were eventually challenged and upheld by the Delaware Supreme Court in ATP Tour v. Deutscher Tennis Bund, 91 A.3d 554 (Del. 2014); however, the victory was short-lived. Less than a year later, the Delaware legislature enacted legislation that explicitly banned fee-shifting bylaws. See Delaware G.C.L. § 109(b).

However, directors can still use bylaw amendments to prohibit shareholders from suing them in courts other than Delaware. In Boilermakers Local 154 Retirement Fund v. Chevron Corp., 73 A.3d 934 (Del. Ch. 2013), the Court of Chancery upheld a director-adopted bylaw that designated Delaware as the exclusive forum for claims involving the internal affairs of the corporation-derivative litigation, fiduciary litigation, and statutory claims under the Delaware code. Shortly thereafter, the Delaware legislature amended the Delaware G.C.L. to codify that result. See Delaware G.C.L. §115. A recent Delaware Supreme Court decision further clarified that the charter can include a so-called federal forum provision that designates federal courts as the exclusive forum to resolve claims brought under the Securities Act of 1933. Salzberg v. Sciabacucchi, 227 A.3d 102 (Del. 2020).
5. The vast majority of shareholder proposals are nonbinding. A 2022 study found that "in almost all cases, shareholder-proponents present their proposals in the form of recommendations to management (so-called "precatory proposals") rather than binding resolutions. Only twenty-two proposals in my sample ( 0.7% ) are binding."
Roberto Tallarita, Stockholder Politics, 73 Hastings L.J. 1697, 1716 (2022). The next subsection considers the legal regime governing these precatory proposals, the goals they typically advance, and some of the thorny policy questions they present.

# PROBLEM 3-17 

Joan owns approximately 10 percent of the outstanding voting shares of Northwest Timber Company, a Delaware corporation. Since her retirement in 2020 as a senior executive of Northwest, Joan has become active in environmental issues. She is concerned about the rate at which the corporation is cutting old-growth timber on company-owned land. She does not think it prudent for the corporation to exceed a sustainable yield, nor does she want to be a party to the ecological consequences associated with overcutting. Joan is also concerned about the impact on Timber City, Northwest's principal place of business, of the corporation's recent decision to move its banking business from a locally owned and operated bank to a New York-based bank with branches throughout the world.

Assuming that Northwest Timber has no special provisions in its articles or bylaws, may Joan make the following proposals at Northwest's next annual shareholders' meeting?
a. That the bylaws be amended to require that the corporation locate its principal banking operations in Timber City.
b. That the bylaws be amended to state that the purpose of the corporation is to conduct all lawful business for a profit, but with due consideration for ensuring that forests are managed to maximize long-term profitability.
c. That the bylaws be amended to create the office of vice president for ecology, with such officer having the responsibility to monitor the corporation's timber-cutting programs and report quarterly to the shareholders as to the shortand long-term economic and ecological effects of such programs.
d. That the bylaws be amended to provide for annual election by the shareholders of all corporate officers.
e. That the bylaws be amended to provide that the corporation pay an annual dividend in the amount of no less than $5 for each share, unless the directors determine in any year that such payment would jeopardize the corporation's short- or long-term viability.
f. That the bylaws be amended to provide that the company's slate of nominees for election to the board at the annual shareholders' meeting must be constructed so that if all such nominees are elected, at least 40 percent of the board will comprise persons self-identifying as female.

## (2) PRECATORY SHAREHOLDER PROPOSALS

If shareholders are unable to take binding action via a bylaw amendment, they do still have a broad right under state corporation law to suggest that the directors take a particular action or adopt a new policy. See, e.g., Auer v. Dressel, 306 N.Y. 427, 118
N.E.2d 590 (1954) (shareholders may call meeting to support ousted president and urge his reinstatement, even though they have no power to force his reappointment). While the exact contours of this right are unclear, it is expansive.

In an introductory note to current Rule 14a-8, the SEC states:
In our experience, most proposals that are cast as recommendations or request that the board take specified action are proper under state law. Accordingly, we will assume that a proposal drafted as a recommendation or suggestion is proper unless the company demonstrates otherwise.

Thus, if shareholders cast their proposal in precatory form - as a mere request that the directors consider a particular form of action - then the proposal may be excluded only if another ground can be found in Rule 14a-8(i). In other words, the SEC and the 14a-8(i) rules recognize the importance of shareholders' ability to try to persuade the board to take actions that the shareholders do not have the power to directly mandate or carry out.

Shareholders frequently make precatory "social" proposals clearly designed to promote discussion of reforms that, arguably, would benefit society generally. For example, a shareholder of a power company might wish to present a proposal asking that the corporation close several of its nuclear plants; a shareholder of a corporation with vast holdings of timber land may submit a proposal to discontinue a logging practice that allegedly threatens valuable wildlife not protected by the federal Endangered Species Act; or a shareholder of a technology company may ask for a report about the environmental impacts of its electronic recycling activities. These social proposals "concern the welfare of society at large, rather than the internal affairs of the company. . . Furthermore, the main goal of the proponents of social proposals is . . . the practical advancement of policy objectives. Many of the main players are interested not only in company-level decisions, but also in market and social change." Roberto Tallarita, Stockholder Politics, 73 Hastings L.J. 1697, 1710 (2022). As a result, they are inherently political: "unlike market-based mechanisms, such as investment or divestment decisions or takeovers, shareholder proposals rely on mechanisms similar to those used by citizens in a democracy, such as voting, ballot proposals, and campaigns in support of specific issues." Id.

Directors often view these proposals as a nuisance and as a usurpation of their management responsibilities. The primary means to exclude such shareholder proposals from a company's proxy statement are the "economic irrelevance" test contained in Rule 14a-8(i) (5) and the "ordinary business" exclusion found in 14a-8(i) (7). The former allows omission of proposals that relate to operations accounting for less than 5 percent of a corporation's total assets, gross sales, and net sales if the proposal "is not otherwise significantly related" to the company's business. The latter allows exclusion of proposals relating to the "ordinary business" of the company. The difference between these sometimes-overlapping provisions is often murky and can only be understood by reference to case law and SEC "no-action letter" precedents.

Where the SEC draws the line on excludability under the "ordinary business" exception is sometimes controversial. What seems socially insignificant in one era may become clearly significant in another. For example, in October 1992, the SEC Division of Corporation Finance issued a no-action letter stating that the SEC would not bring an enforcement action against Cracker Barrel if it refused to include a shareholder proposal from a public pension fund that the company expressly prohibit discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. See Cracker Barrel Old Country Store, Inc., SEC No-Action Letter, 1992 WL 289095 (SEC) (Oct. 13, 1992) (the "Cracker Barrel no-action letter"). The SEC explained its action as follows:

The Division has reconsidered the application of Rule 14a-8(c) (7) to employment related proposals in light of these concerns and the staff's experience with these proposals in recent years. As a result, the Division has determined that the fact that a shareholder proposal concerning a company's employment policies and practices for the general workforce is tied to a social issue will no longer be viewed as removing the proposal from the realm of ordinary business operations of the registrant.

Id. at *1.
In 1998, the SEC formally reversed its position, while explaining its approach to the "ordinary business" exception.

In applying the "ordinary business" exclusion to proposals that raise social policy issues, the Division seeks to use the most well-reasoned and consistent standards possible, given the inherent complexity of the task. From time to time, in light of experience dealing with proposals in specific subject areas, and reflecting changing societal views, the Division adjusts its view with respect to "social policy" proposals involving ordinary business. Over the years, the Division has reversed its position on the excludability of a number of types of proposals, including plant closings, the manufacture of tobacco products, executive compensation, and golden parachutes.

We believe that reversal of the Division's Cracker Barrel no-action letter . . . is warranted. Since 1992, the relative importance of certain social issues relating to employment matters has reemerged as a consistent topic of widespread public debate. In addition, as a result of the extensive policy discussions that the Cracker Barrel position engendered, and through the rulemaking notice and comment process, we have gained a better understanding of the depth of interest among shareholders in having an opportunity to express their views to company management on employment-related proposals that raise sufficiently significant social policy issues.

Reversal of the Cracker Barrel no-action position will result in a return to a case-by-case analytical approach. In making distinctions in this area, the Division and the Commission will continue to apply the applicable standard for determining when a proposal relates to "ordinary business." The standard, originally articulated in the Commission's 1976 release, provided an exception for certain proposals that raise significant social policy issues.

While we acknowledge that there is no bright-line test to determine when employmentrelated shareholder proposals raising social issues fall within the scope of the "ordinary business" exclusion, the staff will make reasoned distinctions in deciding whether to furnish "no-action" relief. Although a few of the distinctions made in those cases may be somewhat tenuous, we believe that on the whole the benefit to shareholders will outweigh the problematic aspects of the few decisions in the middle ground.

Amendments to Rules on Shareholder Proposals (May 21, 1998), 1998 WL 254809 (S.E.C.), at *3-4.

The following case explores the contours of the "socially significant" limitation on a corporation's ability to exclude shareholder proposals. Note that since this case was decided, the rule has been renumbered, but the order and the first and last digits of each rule remain the same so that what the case refers to as, e.g., Rule 14a-8(c) (5) is now Rule 14a-8(i) (5).
# Lovenheim v. Iroquois Brands, Ltd. <br> United States District Court, District of Columbia, 1985 <br> 618 F. Supp. 554 

GASCH, District Judge.

## I. Background

This matter is now before the Court on plaintiff's motion for preliminary injunction.

Plaintiff Peter C. Lovenheim, owner of two hundred shares of common stock in Iroquois Brands, Ltd. (hereinafter "Iroquois/Delaware"), seeks to bar Iroquois/Delaware from excluding from the proxy materials being sent to all shareholders in preparation for an upcoming shareholder meeting information concerning a proposed resolution he intends to offer at the meeting. Mr. Lovenheim's proposed resolution relates to the procedure used to force-feed geese for production of paté de foie gras in France, ^2 a type of paté imported by Iroquois/Delaware. Specifically, his resolution calls upon the Directors of Iroquois/Delaware to:
form a committee to study the methods by which its French supplier produces paté de foie gras, and report to the shareholders its findings and opinions, based on expert consultation, on whether this production method causes undue distress, pain or suffering to the animals involved and, if so, whether further distribution of this product should be discontinued until a more humane production method is developed.

## Attachment to Affidavit of Peter C. Lovenheim.

Iroquois/Delaware has refused to allow information concerning Mr. Lovenheim's proposal to be included in proxy materials being sent in connection with the next annual shareholders meeting. In doing so, Iroquois/Delaware relies on an exception to the general requirement of Rule 14a-8, Rule 14a-8(c) (5). That exception provides that an issuer of securities "may omit a proposal and any statement in support thereof" from its proxy statement and form of proxy: "if the proposal relates to operations which account for less than 5 percent of the issuer's total assets at the end of its Force-feeding usually begins when the geese are four months old. On some farms where feeding is mechanized, the bird's body and wings are placed in a metal brace and its neck is stretched. Through a funnel inserted 10-12 inches down the throat of the goose, a machine pumps up to 400 grams of corn-based mash into its stomach. An elastic band around the goose's throat prevents regurgitation. When feeding is manual, a handler uses a funnel and stick to force the mash down.
. . . Plaintiff contends that such force-feeding is a form of cruelty to animals. Plaintiff has offered no evidence that force-feeding is used by Iroquois/Delaware's supplier in producing the paté imported by Iroquois/Delaware. However his proposal calls upon the committee he seeks to create to investigate this question.
most recent fiscal year, and for less than 5 percent of its net earnings and gross sales for its most recent fiscal year, and is not otherwise significantly related to the issuer's business." Rule 14a-8(c) (5)....

# II. Likelihood of Plaintiff Prevailing on Merits . . . 

## C. APPLICABILITY OF RULE 14a-8(c)(5) EXCEPTION

In light of the above discussion of the service and jurisdiction issues, the likelihood of plaintiff's prevailing in this litigation turns primarily on the applicability to plaintiff's proposal of the exception to the shareholder proposal rule contained in Rule 14a-8(c) (5).

Iroquois/Delaware's reliance on the argument that this exception applies is based on the following information contained in the affidavit of its president: Iroquois/ Delaware has annual revenues of $141 million with $6 million in annual profits and $78 million in assets. In contrast, its paté de foie gras sales were just $79,000 last year, representing a net loss on paté sales of $3,121. Iroquois/Delaware has only $34,000 in assets related to paté. Thus none of the company's net earnings and less than .05 percent of its assets are implicated by plaintiff s proposal. These levels are obviously far below the five percent threshold set forth in the first portion of the exception claimed by Iroquois/Delaware.

Plaintiff does not contest that his proposed resolution relates to a matter of little economic significance to Iroquois/Delaware. Nevertheless he contends that the Rule 14a-8(c) (5) exception is not applicable as it cannot be said that his proposal "is not otherwise significantly related to the issuer's business" as is required by the final portion of that exception. In other words, plaintiff's argument that Rule 14a-8 does not permit omission of his proposal rests on the assertion that the rule and statute on which it is based do not permit omission merely because a proposal is not economically significant where a proposal has "ethical or social significance." ^8

Iroquois/Delaware challenges plaintiff's view that ethical and social proposals cannot be excluded even if they do not meet the economic or five percent test. Instead, Iroquois/Delaware views the exception solely in economic terms as permitting omission of any proposals relating to a de minimis share of assets and profits. Iroquois/Delaware asserts that since corporations are economic entities, only an economic test is appropriate.

The Court would note that the applicability of the Rule 14a-8(c) (5) exception to Mr. Lovenheim's proposal represents a close question given the lack of clarity in the exception itself. In effect, plaintiff relies on the word "otherwise," suggesting that it indicates the drafters of the rule intended that other noneconomic tests of significance be used. Iroquois/Delaware relies on the fact that the rule examines other significance in relation to the issuer's business. Because of the apparent ambiguity of the rule, the Court considers the history of the shareholder proposal rule in determining the proper interpretation of the most recent version of that rule.

Prior to 1983, paragraph 14a-8(c) (5) excluded proposals "not significantly related to the issuer's business" but did not contain an objective economic significance test such as the five percent of sales, assets, and earnings specified in the first part of the current version. ^9 Although a series of SEC decisions through 1976 allowing issuers to exclude proposals challenging compliance with the Arab economic boycott of Israel allowed exclusion if the issuer did less than one percent of their business with Arab countries or Israel, the Commission stated later in 1976 that it did "not believe that subparagraph (c) (5) should be hinged solely on the economic relativity of a proposal." Securities Exchange Act Release No. 12,999, 41 Fed. Reg. 52,994, 52,997 (1976). Thus the Commission required inclusion "in many situations in which the related business comprised less than one percent" of the company's revenues, profits or assets "where the proposal has raised policy questions important enough to be considered 'significantly related' to the issuer's business." ^11

As indicated above, the 1983 revision adopted the five percent test of economic significance in an effort to create a more objective standard. Nevertheless, in adopting this standard, the Commission stated that proposals will be includable notwithstanding their "failure to reach the specified economic thresholds if a significant relationship to the issuer's business is demonstrated on the face of the resolution or supporting statement." Securities Exchange Act Release No. 19,135, 47 Fed. Reg. 47,420,47,428 (1982). Thus it seems clear based on the history of the rule that "the meaning of 'significantly related' is not limited to economic significance." Comment, 1983 Amendments (emphasis in original).

The only decision in this Circuit cited by the parties relating to the scope of §14 and the shareholder proposal rule is Medical Committee for Human Rights v. SEC, 432 F.2d 659 (D.C. Cir. 1970). That case concerned an effort by shareholders of Dow Chemical Company to advise other shareholders of their proposal directed at prohibiting Dow's production of napalm. Dow had relied on the counterpart of the 14a-8(c) (5) exemption then in effect to exclude the proposal from proxy materials and the SEC accepted Dow's position without elaborating on its basis for doing so. In remanding the matter back to the SEC for the Commission to provide the basis for its decision, id. at 682, the Court noted what it termed "substantial questions" as to whether 10. Comment, 1983 Amendments (emphasis supplied). For example, "[p]roposals requesting the cessation of further development, planning and construction of nuclear power plants and proposals requesting shareholders be informed as to all aspects of the company's business in European communist countries have been included in this way."
an interpretation of the shareholder proposal rule "which permitted omission of [a] proposal as one motivated primarily by general political or social concerns would conflict with the congressional intent underlying § 14(a) of the [Exchange] Act" 432 F.2d at 680 (emphasis in original). ^15 Iroquois/Delaware attempts to distinguish Medical Committee for Human Rights as a case where a company sought to exclude a proposal that, unlike Mr. Lovenheim's proposal, was economically significant merely because the motivation of the proponents was political. The argument is not without appeal given the fact that the Medical Committee Court was confronted with a regulation that contained no reference to economic significance. Yet the Medical Committee decision contains language suggesting that the Court assumed napalm was not economically significant to Dow: "The management of Dow Chemical Company is repeatedly quoted in sources which include the company's own publications as proclaiming that the decision to continue manufacturing and marketing napalm was made not because of business considerations, but in spite of them; that management in essence decided to pursue a course of activity which generated little profit for the shareholders..." (emphasis in original).

This Court need not consider, as the Medical Committee decision implied, whether a rule allowing exclusion of all proposals not meeting specified levels of economic significance violates the scope of §14 (a) of the Exchange Act. Whether or not the Securities and Exchange Commission could properly adopt such a rule, the Court cannot ignore the history of the rule which reveals no decision by the Commission to limit the determination to the economic criteria relied on by Iroquois/Delaware. The Court therefore holds that in light of the ethical and social significance of plaintiff's proposal and the fact that it implicates significant levels of sales, plaintiff has shown a likelihood of prevailing on the merits with regard to the issue of whether his proposal is "otherwise significantly related" to Iroquois/Delaware's business. ^16. . .

# NOTES AND QUESTIONS 

1. Until the mid-1980s, a "truth" about Rule 14a-8 proposals was that the shareholder proponents had no chance of obtaining majority support, and little chance of obtaining even a 5 percent vote. This "truth" changed with the advent of activist institutional shareholders, initially led by large pension funds, who began to use the shareholder proposal process to oppose management efforts to make corporations impregnable to unfriendly takeovers. By the mid-1990s, shareholder 16. The result would, of course, be different if plaintiff's proposal was ethically significant in the abstract but had no meaningful relationship to the business of Iroquois/Delaware as Iroquois/Delaware was not engaged in the business of importing paté de foic gras.
proposals to improve corporate governance structures were routinely receiving at least 30 percent of the vote, and early in the 2000s a significant number of proposals received a majority vote.
2. Recall that shareholder votes on precatory proposals are nonbinding. The real impact of these federal channels for persuasive communication depends on what happens next. Making a vote on a shareholder proposal nonbinding reflects the basic notion of director centrality that is the beginning point for state law. Federal law has not been willing to overturn that core point. However, the directors' power to ignore the will of a majority of the shareholders, or the concerns expressed by a substantial number though less than a majority, has begun to give way to a new reality. In particular, institutional investors have combined federal law channels and the shareholder state law rights discussed earlier in this chapter to change the directors' calculus of how to respond to nonbinding shareholder votes.
3. Note that typically, "winning" shareholder proposals have generally been corporate governance proposals; proposals seeking to promote broader social goals, such as the one in the Lowenheim case, tended to receive little support. In 2020 and 2021, however, support for environmental and social proposals began trending upward, and several environmental shareholder proposals even secured majority support, including proposals urging Chevron to report climate-change lobbying disclosures and calling on Occidental Petroleum to report on the impact that climate change would have on the company's business. See Roberto Tallarita, Stockholder Politics, 73 Hastings L.J. 1697, 1700 (2024) ("In 2010, social proposals obtained 18\% of the votes on average; in 2021, the number of votes had almost doubled to more than 35%. From 2010 to 2019 , only 1% of social proposals on average obtained a majority at the annual meeting; in 2020 and 2021,16% of social proposals did."). The reason for this change was that large institutional shareholders had been more willing to support environmental and social proposals.

Since 2022, this trend has reversed somewhat. In particular, institutional investors have been less willing to support so-called "ESG" (environmental, social, and governance) proposals after receiving pushback from red state politicians who argued that their support was politically motivated and not consistent with the best interests of their investors. As a result, shareholder proposals urging companies to consider ESG issues have been less successful. See Paul Verney, ESG Shareholder Proposal Withdrawals Fall to 10-Year Low as Support Declines, Responsible Investor (Oct. 2, 2024) ("Since [2022], the anti-ESG push in the US has intensified, average support for proposals has fallen [from 33 percent] to 29 percent in 2022, 21 percent in 2023, and 19 percent in 2024.").
4. In contrast to CA, the shareholder activist in Lowenheim was not an institutional shareholder. Although most retail shareholders tend toward rational apathy, a handful of small-stakes retail shareholders use their 14a-8 shareholder proposal power to agitate for changes. These shareholders are known as "corporate gadflies." And these investors make a big impact. As a recent study revealed, "in 2018, a small group of five individuals accounted for close to 40% of all shareholder proposals submitted to S\&P 1500 companies. As a whole, gadflies as well as other individual shareholders submitted 2,628 proposals during our sample period ( 38.5% of all proposals), exceeding more established investors, such large institutional investors, hedge funds, and the uber-rich investors. Clearly, gadflies' scope of activity is no longer marginal." Kobi Kastiel \& Yaron Nili, The Giant Shadow of Corporate Gadflies, Harv. L. Sch. F. on Corp. Governance (Apr. 21, 2021). The authors' complete study can be found in Yaron Nili \& Kobi Kastiel, The Giant Shadow of Corporate Gadflies, 94 S. Cal. L. Rev. 569 (2021). Typically, corporate gadflies submit corporate governance proposals; by contrast, the vast majority of social proposals are submitted by institutional actors, such as ESG funds or religious groups. Why might small-stakes shareholders overcome their rational apathy to become active participants in corporate governance? Do you think their influence is likely to be beneficial or harmful?

# PROBLEM 3-18 

Revisit Problem 3-17. For those proposals that are impermissible when styled as bylaw amendments, which would the company be able to omit from its proxy materials if Joan submitted them in precatory form?

## PROBLEM 3-19

Trylon, Inc. is a publicly traded corporation whose principal business is genetic research and sale of the resulting products. As do most American corporations, Trylon has a policy of making unrestricted charitable contributions to nonprofit organizations that its Charitable Contributions Subcommittee deems worthy causes. Such gifts never exceed 1 percent of net income annually. Included in Trylon's list of donees are a number of major medical research universities.

Trylon recently received the following shareholder proposal for inclusion in management's proxy for the upcoming annual shareholders' meeting.

The shareholders hereby request that the corporation refrain from making charitable contribution to organizations that perform abortions.

May Trylon omit this proposal from its proxy materials?

## PROBLEM 3-20

Publishers, Inc., a NYSE-traded corporation, recently received the following shareholder proposal for inclusion in its proxy for the upcoming annual shareholders' meeting:

The shareholders hereby request that the board adopt as corporate policy the following resolution to be implemented as soon as possible without violating any existing contracts or contractual obligations.

Resolved, that it is the policy of Publishers, Inc. that the company's CEO shall be compensated annually in a total amount, including bonuses and changes in value of retirement plans, deferred compensation rights, and incentive compensation rights (including vested or non-vested stock options), that is no more than 50 times the average compensation (similarly computed) of the company's full-time workforce. In other words, if in a given year the average total compensation of the company's workforce is $100,000, then the maximum total compensation for the company's CEO in that year would be $5,000,000.

May Publishers omit this proposal from its proxy materials?

# PROBLEM 3-21 

Your firm has been asked to review the following shareholder proposal recently submitted by the International Sisterhood of Carpenters Pension Fund:

## REINCORPORATION IN NORTH DAKOTA PROPOSAL

Resolved: That the shareholders of MacroChip ("Company") hereby request that the Board of Directors take the measures necessary to change the Company's jurisdiction of incorporation from Oregon to North Dakota.

Supporting Statement: In 2007, North Dakota enacted the North Dakota Publicly Traded Corporations Act ("NDPTCA"), which was advertised as the first shareholder-friendly incorporation law in the United States. The state's secretary of state was quoted as saying corporations "can incorporate under this new system of corporate governance that is designed to be more responsive to the shareholders, who are the owners of the company. In our state they will have a clear choice."

Under the NDPTCA, corporations formed or reincorporating in North Dakota will have a governance regime that includes the following:

- Majority voting in election of directors;
- Advisory shareholder votes on compensation reports;
- Proxy access to 5 percent shareholders who have held shares for at least two years;
- Reimbursement for successful proxy contests proportional to success; and - Separation of the roles of board chairperson and CEO.

The MacroChip Board is actively considering reincorporating in Delaware and would like to omit the North Dakota proposal from its proxy materials. What would be the possible grounds for omitting the proposal under Rule 14a-8?

## (3) HOW SHAREHOLDER PROPOSALS DRIVE MARKET-WIDE GOVERNANCE CHANGE: THE CAMPAIGN FOR MAJORITY VOTING

As the previous cases make clear, Rule 14a-8 can be a powerful tool for change at a particular company. And shareholder activists have used their power under this rule to drive market-wide change, in response to dissatisfaction with state law governance defaults. In the excerpt below, make sure you understand how shareholders have wielded Rule 14a-8 to dramatically affect governance practices at public companies. Pay close attention to the market actors that appear in this history.
# Majority Voting in Director Elections: A Look Back and A Look Ahead 

Simpson Thacher Client Alert (Aug. 4, 2006)
The momentum towards majority voting in the election of directors has continued to build inexorably. ISS has reported that more than 140 majority vote stockholder proposals were filed in the 2006 proxy season. Largely in response to these proposals, over 25% of the companies in the S\&P 500 now have some form of majority voting provision in place, a particularly high percentage given the limited number of companies that had majority voting before the recent movement. Most of these companies have adopted one of two alternatives: (i) a director resignation policy or (ii) a majority voting by-law. Companies that have adopted some form of majority voting provision include Berkshire Hathaway, Dell, Intel, Microsoft, Pfizer, Time Warner and Walt Disney.

Other evidence in 2006 of the continuing momentum towards majority voting includes the following:

- The ABA Committee on Corporate Laws adopted, in late June 2006, amendments to the Model Business Corporation Act (MBCA) to facilitate the adoption of majority voting bylaws by either the board of directors or stockholders (despite continuing to provide for plurality voting in the absence of specific charter or by-law provisions providing for majority voting).
- The Delaware legislature has, effective August 1, 2006, adopted certain amendments to the Delaware General Corporation Law relating to majority voting (to enforce director resignations and to facilitate the adoption of majority voting by-laws by either the board or stockholders).
- Chairman Cox of the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) recently announced that he is "completely supportive" of majority voting.
- There are rumors suggesting that 200 majority voting stockholder proposals will be submitted in 2007.


## I. The Birth of the Majority Vote Movement

The push for majority voting from activist stockholders arose out of dissatisfaction with the director election process that had been building for years. Most states, including Delaware, provide for plurality voting for the election of directors as the default standard and most public companies have traditionally not adopted a different standard. Plurality voting means that those nominees who receive the most votes for their election, up to the number of available seats, are elected to the board, without regard to the number of votes against or not cast. Plurality voting was designed, in part, to address a concern that none of the candidates seeking office in a contested election would receive the required majority vote. Critics of the current system claim that the prohibitive cost of soliciting votes leads to virtually all director elections being uncontested. Stockholders are given proxy cards that allow them to vote for the election of a nominee or withhold authority to cast their votes. Under the plurality voting standard, a nominee could win even if he or she received more withhold votes than votes for his or her election. While withhold votes are an effective means to communicate dissatisfaction and have symbolic value, they have no legal consequence as no amount of "withhold" votes can defeat a nominee under a plurality voting standard.

As a means to address perceived problems in the election of directors, stockholder activists . . . focused on majority voting as an alternative. Under majority voting, a candidate would be elected as a director only if such candidate receives a majority of the votes cast. Majority voting is not untested, as it is standard practice in a number of European nations (e.g., U.K., Germany and France) and is either required or the default standard in Illinois and Missouri. A number of companies in the S\&P 500 domiciled in the U.S. had majority voting prior to the advent of the majority voting movement, including U.S. Bancorp, Best Buy and Lockheed Martin. Stockholder activists seek to use majority voting as a vehicle to attach real consequences to a vote where a majority of stockholders reject the nominee. ISS contends that the failure of a director to win a majority vote would have the desirable consequence of precipitating boardroom action and putting pressure on boards to negotiate a solution with dissatisfied stockholders.

# II. The Rapid Growth of the Majority Vote Movement 

## A. STOCKHOLDER PROPOSALS

Against this backdrop majority vote stockholder proposals became increasingly prevalent and a high profile issue for activist stockholders. As recently as 2004, stockholder proposals recommending the implementation of majority voting were virtually nonexistent. The 2005 proxy season, however, was a much different story. ISS tracked 89 majority vote proposals that year, compared to a mere 14 from the 2004 proxy season. This "proposal boom" has continued in 2006, with ISS reporting that more than 140 majority vote stockholder proposals were filed for this year's proxy season.

Virtually all of the proposals for majority voting have been submitted by the United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners and other building trade unions and pension funds. The proposals have been submitted under Rule 14a-8 to be voted on at the annual meeting and the SEC has generally been reluctant to approve the omission of these proposals. Most of these proposals have been precatory and simply recommend that the board implement majority voting. . . .

A small number of these proposals have been in the form of binding by-law proposals. . . .Binding by-law proposals to effect majority voting can generally be prepared in a form that would be legal in Delaware (under the MBCA majority voting can only be provided in the charter). A variation on the binding by-law voting proposal has been submitted by Lucian Bebchuk, a Professor at Harvard Law School and governance expert. Ilis by-law proposal seeks to amend the by-laws of a subject company to provide that a director shall be ineligible to stand for election if that director were elected for the immediately preceding term in an uncontested election in which he or she received more "withheld" votes than "for" votes. While not yet subject to a court ruling, a reasonable case could be made that such a by-law is valid under Delaware law.

# B. CORPORATIONS RESPOND TO MAJORITY PROPOSALS 

## 1. The Pfizer Approach and Its Reception in the Governance Community

The most prevalent form of majority voting provision that has been adopted in response to stockholder demands is the Pfizer-style governance policy. . . .Pfizer was one of the first companies to adopt majority voting in some form to mitigate stockholder concerns about plurality voting, and its approach has been widely followed. The voting policy adopted by Pfizer in June 2005 (revised October 2005), which is incorporated in its governance principles, provides that in an uncontested election any nominee who receives a greater number of "withhold" votes than votes "for" must promptly offer his or her resignation. The Corporate Governance Committee (without the participation of the director that submitted the resignation) is then to consider the resignation offer and make a recommendation to the Board. The Board is obligated to act on the Corporate Governance Committee's recommendation within 90 days following certification of the stockholder vote. Thereafter, the Board is to promptly disclose its decision regarding whether to accept such director's resignation and disclose it in a Form 8-K. The Pfizer policy does not apply in a contested election to mitigate the possibility of a failed election as well as a recognition that majority voting is unnecessary where stockholders are offered a choice among competing candidates.

Proponents of the Pfizer approach cite its flexibility in addressing situations in which immediate vacancies would be problematic, especially to the extent an immediate resignation would lead to the loss of the CEO, Chairman of the Audit Committee or other key director. Since Pfizer's adoption of its voting policy last June, over 100 companies have followed suit. The trigger for a resignation is typically whether more shares are "withheld" than cast "for" election, but a limited number of companies use a majority of the outstanding shares standard. Some commentators have pointed out that a majority of outstanding shares is a truer expression of stockholder will, but this standard has not won support from key stockholder groups and has been rarely used.

The Pfizer approach has been unpopular with activist institutional investors. Ed Durkin, Director of Corporate Affairs at the Carpenters Union, said that adoption of a Pfizer-style director's resignation policy is inadequate: "The companies have not adopted a majority vote standard, rather they've adopted legally unenforceable (at least in Delaware) resignation policies to cover the situation when directors get elected under the Company's plurality vote standard, but the level of symbolic 'withheld' votes exceeds a certain level." Similarly, ISS has made it clear that it supports a "true" majority voting standard and will "generally recommend for" majority voting proposals even if a subject company has previously adopted a Pfizer-style director resignation policy. ISS has noted that director resignation policies lack the force of a by-law amendment and may be altered with relative ease. . . .
# 2. The Intel Approach and Its Implications 

The leading alternative to the Pfizer model, which was popularized by Intel, provides for majority voting in the by-laws. Intel's by-laws . . . provide that in uncontested elections each director will be elected by the vote of the majority of votes cast. A majority of votes cast means that the number of shares voted "for" a director must exceed the number of votes cast "against" that director. If a director were not elected, the director is obligated to offer his or her resignation to the board. The Corporate Governance and Nominating Committee would then make a recommendation to the Board on whether to accept or reject the resignation or whether other action should be taken. The Board will publicly disclose its decision and the rationale behind it within 90 days of the certification of the election results. To implement the Intel approach, proxy cards need to be revised to accommodate "for" and "against" votes.

Since Intel adopted its majority vote by-law in January 2006, at least 30 companies have adopted majority vote by-laws (including Dell and United Technologies). . . .To date, the Intel approach has been warmly embraced by the activist investor community. Mr. Durkin said that "Intel has got it right. They have set the standard." This view was echoed by Pat McGurn, Executive Vice President of ISS, who viewed the Intel approach as the "gold standard". . . .

## IV. The Future of the Majority Vote Movement

## A. RESULTS OF THE 2006 PROXY SEASON

The 2006 proxy season results are substantially complete, and the returns show significant support for majority voting, particularly at corporations that have not adopted either director resignation policies or majority voting by-laws. ISS has indicated that stockholder resolutions are averaging 54.5% of votes cast at 33 companies that have not adopted a director resignation policy or majority voting by-law. . . .

## NOTES AND QUESTIONS

1. The trend toward majority voting continued in the years that followed the publication of this alert, and today, nearly 90 percent of S\&P 500 companies use majority voting in some form. However, smaller companies have tended to opt for the default of plurality voting. Why might such a substantial difference exist between the governance of large versus small companies?
2. Recall that the CA case holds that shareholders as well as directors may amend bylaws and that shareholders may even address procedural matters so long as they do not interfere with the board's management of the corporation. In 2006, both the Delaware G.C.I.. and the MBCA were amended to address the possibility of a majority vote requirement. The Delaware amendments permitted a director resignation to be made conditional and effective upon the happening of a future event, such as failure to receive a majority vote. This opened up the possibility of voluntary agreements by corporations and their directors that a director would resign if failing to receive a majority vote, but provided less certainty for more hostile efforts. The Delaware amendments also expressly permitted a provision that would make such advance resignations irrevocable. The MBCA amendments authorize bylaw provisions whereby a director who fails to receive a majority vote must resign within 90 days.
3. Critics of the campaign for majority voting argue that it does little to actually improve board accountability. Most often, directors will receive majority approval, and even when they do not, they are unlikely to be forced to leave. The effect on director behavior may be indirect, however: if a director perceives a greater threat to their incumbency, they may work harder for shareholders. This indirect effect continues to motivate advocates of majority voting in their efforts.
4. In a typical director election, shareholders are presented with a ballot in which they can cast an affirmative vote for a director candidate or withhold that vote (in some situations they can also vote against the director). For years, shareholders have waged "withhold" campaigns, in which an activist shareholder solicits other shareholders to withhold their votes from a director or slate of director candidates, in response to dissatisfaction with a particular issue. Before 2006, these campaigns were largely symbolic because no amount of withheld votes could affect a director's election under plurality voting so long as one shareholder voted in favor. But under majority voting, a withhold campaign could turn a director's election into a nail-biter and put substantial pressure on the board.

# NOTE ON THE DECLINE OF STAGGERED BOARDS 

Shareholders have also used their Rule 14a-8 power to change the governance landscape in another major way, by pushing for the elimination of staggered boards. Staggered terms for boards of directors, discussed in Part B of this chapter, have been authorized in Delaware law since 1899, and were a core defense to hostile takeovers (as discussed in Chapter 7) in the 1980s and for decades thereafter. As such, they became ubiquitous in public companies, but not without controversy. In particular, shareholder activists long argued that companies should elect all of their directors annually so as to facilitate more effective monitoring and replacement of deficient managers. These pleas largely fell on deaf ears past the turn of this century. But as noted by Marcel Kahan and Edward Rock in Embattled CEOs, 88 Tex. L. Rev. 987, 1009 (2010), among S\&P 100 companies, "the incidence of staggered boards . . . declined from 44% to 16% between 2003 and 2009" (and continued to decline thereafter although the pattern followed a slower pace for firms outside the S\&P 500). What would lead to such a dramatic change after such a long period of stability?

Staggered-board provisions are almost always in the firm's articles of incorporation, usually placed there before the firm's IPO so that a vote of the firm's public shareholders would not be required. As a result, shareholders lack sufficient power to remove this provision without first removing the directors. Recall the default provisions of state law that require both director and shareholder approval to amend the articles; directors thus have a gatekeeper role that permits them to veto changes they dislike by simply refusing to propose a change to the articles. Shareholders regularly submitted and received majority shareholder votes in favor of Rule 14a-8 proposals asking corporations to change to annual election of all directors. Of course, these precatory proposals could not directly effect a change in the corporation's governance rules.

Directors, though, suddenly showed a willingness to implement or respond positively to the "persuasive" shareholder proposals about staggered boards because institutional shareholders showed a greater willingness to use their power to vote directors out. If a Rule 14a-8 resolution to end staggered boards achieved a majority vote of shareholders and was not implemented by the board, the next year could see a campaign to turn out the board nominees or withhold votes.

The result of this one-two punch is that shareholders waged a highly successful campaign to reshape the shareholder governance role as it relates to the election of directors. The new willingness of large institutional shareholders to vote in favor of these proposals (and vote against management who failed to respond) caused high rates of passage, leading to a major shift in the balance of power without any change in state or federal law.

# (4) SHAREHOLDER PROXY ACCESS TO NOMINATE DIRECTORS 

A proxy fight, in which shareholders band together to oppose or in some cases even present alternatives to a director's election, is a powerful tool for change. In order to prevail, shareholders need to get their desired candidates on the ballot and to be able to solicit votes for those candidates, often in opposition to candidates put forward by the incumbent managers. However, proxy contests are prohibitively costly for most investors. A primary reason is that shareholders waging proxy fights must bear the cost of circulating a separate proxy. Few shareholders are willing or able to do this, and the result is that "[a] director has a better chance of being struck by lightning than losing an election" (as the former SEC chairman Arthur Levitt Jr. famously put it).

Efforts to increase shareholders' active participation have historically had difficulty gaining traction, partly because of uncertainty as to SEC authority in this area. However, in 2010 Congress passed the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, which clearly gave the SEC rulemaking authority to provide shareholders proxy access to nominate director candidates. The SEC quickly adopted a rule providing shareholders controlling 3 percent of a company's voting power continuously for a three-year period the right to nominate directors for up to 25 percent of the company's board seats up for election. Unlike the typical candidate put forth pursuant to a proxy fight, these proxy access candidates would be required to be added to the company's own proxy, vastly decreasing the expense of waging a proxy fight. Predictably, however, this rule generated fierce opposition from corporate management. Two industry association groups, the Business Roundtable and the Chamber of Commerce, challenged the rule in court, winning a favorable decision in the D.C. Circuit, embedded below.
# Business Roundtable v. SEC <br> United States Court of Appeals, District of Columbia Circuit, 2011 647 F.3d 1144 

Ginsburg, Circuit Judge:
The Business Roundtable and the Chamber of Commerce of the United States, each of which has corporate members that issue publicly traded securities, petition for review of Exchange Act Rule 14a-11. The rule requires public companies to provide shareholders with information about, and their ability to vote for, shareholdernominated candidates for the board of directors. The petitioners argue the Securities and Exchange Commission promulgated the rule in violation of the Administrative Procedure Act, 5 U.S.C. §551 et seq., because, among other reasons, the Commission failed adequately to consider the rule's effect upon efficiency, competition, and capital formation, as required by Section 3(f) of the Exchange Act and Section 2(c) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, codified at 15 U.S.C. §§78c(f) and 80a-2(c), respectively. For these reasons and more, we grant the petition for review and vacate the rule.

## I. Background

The proxy process is the principal means by which shareholders of a publicly traded corporation elect the company's board of directors. Typically, incumbent directors nominate a candidate for each vacancy prior to the election, which is held at the company's annual meeting. Before the meeting the company puts information about each nominee in the set of "proxy materials" - usually comprising a proxy voting card and a proxy statement-it distributes to all shareholders. The proxy statement concerns voting procedures and background information about the board's nominee(s); the proxy card enables shareholders to vote for or against the nominee(s) without attending the meeting. A shareholder who wishes to nominate a different candidate may separately file his own proxy statement and solicit votes from shareholders, thereby initiating a "proxy contest."

Rule 14a-11 provides shareholders an alternative path for nominating and electing directors. Concerned the current process impedes the expression of shareholders' right under state corporation laws to nominate and elect directors, the Commission proposed the rule, see Facilitating Shareholder Director Nominations, 74 Fed. Reg. 29,024, 29,025-26 (2009) (hereinafter Proposing Release), and adopted it with the goal of ensuring "the proxy process functions, as nearly as possible, as a replacement for an actual in-person meeting of shareholders," 75 Fed. Reg. 56,668, 56,670 (2010) (hereinafter Adopting Release). After responding to public comments, the Commission amended the proposed rule and, by a vote of three to two, adopted Rule 14a-11. Id. at 56,677 . The rule requires a company subject to the Exchange Act proxy rules, including an investment company (such as a mutual fund) registered under the Investment Company Act of 1940 (ICA), to include in its proxy materials "the name of a person or persons nominated by a [qualifying] shareholder or group of shareholders for election to the board of directors." Id. at 56,682.
To use Rule 14a-11, a shareholder or group of shareholders must have continuously held "at least 3% of the voting power of the company's securities entitled to be voted" for at least three years prior to the date the nominating shareholder or group submits notice of its intent to use the rule, and must continue to own those securities through the date of the annual meeting. Id. at 56,674-75. The nominating shareholder or group must submit the notice, which may include a statement of up to 500 words in support of each of its nominees, to the Commission and to the company. Id. at 56,675-76. A company that receives notice from an eligible shareholder or group must include the proffered information about the shareholder(s) and his nominee(s) in its proxy statement and include the nominee(s) on the proxy voting card. Id. at 56,676/1.

The Commission did place certain limitations upon the application of Rule 14a-11. The rule does not apply if applicable state law or a company's governing documents "prohibit shareholders from nominating a candidate for election as a director." Id. at 56,674/3. Nor may a shareholder use Rule 14a-11 if he is holding the company's securities with the intent of effecting a change of control of the company. Id. at 56,675/1. The company is not required to include in its proxy materials more than one shareholder nominee or the number of nominees, if more than one, equal to 25 percent of the number of directors on the board. Id. at 56,675/2.

The Commission concluded that Rule 14a-11 could create "potential benefits of improved board and company performance and shareholder value" sufficient to "justify [its] potential costs." Id. at 56,761/1. The agency rejected proposals to let each company's board or a majority of its shareholders decide whether to incorporate Rule 14a-11 in its bylaws, saying that "exclusive reliance on private ordering under State law would not be as effective and efficient" in facilitating shareholders' right to nominate and elect directors. Id. at 56,759-60. The Commission also rejected the suggestion it exclude investment companies from Rule 14a11. Id. at 56,684/1. The two Commissioners voting against the rule faulted the Commission on both theoretical and empirical grounds. See Commissioner Troy A. Paredes, Statement at Open Meeting to Adopt the Final Rule Regarding "Proxy Access" (Aug. 25, 2010), available at http:// www.sec.gov/news/speech/2010/spch082510tap.htm; Commissioner Kathleen L. Casey, Statement at Open Meeting to Adopt Amendments Regarding "Proxy Access" (Aug. 25, 2010), available at http://www.sec.gov/news/speech/2010/spch082510klc. htm (faulting Commission for failing to act "on the basis of empirical data and sound analysis").

When several nominating shareholders are eligible to use Rule 14a-11, "the nominating shareholder or group with the highest percentage of the company's voting power would have its nominees included in the company's proxy materials." 75 Fed. Reg. at 56,675/2. The petitioners sought review in this court in September 2010. The Commission then stayed the final rule, which was to have been effective on November 15 , pending the outcome of this case.

# II. ANALYSIS 

Under the APA, we will set aside agency action that is "arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with law." 5 U.S.C. §706(2) (A).
We must assure ourselves the agency has "examine[d] the relevant data and articulate[d] a satisfactory explanation for its action including a rational connection between the facts found and the choices made." Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass'n of U.S., Inc. v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983) (internal quotation marks omitted). The Commission also has a "statutory obligation to determine as best it can the economic implications of the rule." Chamber of Commerce v. SEC, 412 F.3d 133, 143 (D.C. Cir. 2005).

Indeed, the Commission has a unique obligation to consider the effect of a new rule upon "efficiency, competition, and capital formation," 15 U.S.C. §§78c(f), $78 \mathrm{w}(\mathrm{a})(2), 80 \mathrm{a}-2(\mathrm{c})$, and its failure to "apprise itself-and hence the public and the Congress-of the economic consequences of a proposed regulation" makes promulgation of the rule arbitrary and capricious and not in accordance with law. Chamber of Commerce, 412 F.3d at 144; Pub. Citizen v. Fed. Motor Carrier Safety Admin., 374 F.3d 1209, 1216 (D.C. Cir. 2004) (rule was arbitrary and capricious because agency failed to consider a factor required by statute).

The petitioners argue the Commission acted arbitrarily and capriciously here because it neglected its statutory responsibility to determine the likely economic consequences of Rule 14a-11 and to connect those consequences to efficiency, competition, and capital formation. They also maintain the Commission's decision to apply Rule 14a-11 to investment companies is arbitrary and capricious.

We agree with the petitioners and hold the Commission aced arbitrarily and capriciously for having failed once again-as it did most recently in American Equity Investment Life Insurance Company v. SEC, 613 F.3d 166, 167-68 (D.C. Cir. 2010), and before that in Chamber of Commerce, 412 F.3d at 136-adequately to assess the economic effects of a new rule. Here the Commission inconsistently and opportunistically framed the costs and benefits of the rule; failed adequately to quantify the certain costs or to explain why those costs could not be quantified; neglected to support its predictive judgments; contradicted itself; and failed to respond to substantial problems raised by commenters. For these and other reasons, its decision to apply the rule to investment companies was also arbitrary. Because we conclude the Commission failed to justify Rule 14a-11, we need not address the petitioners' additional argument the Commission arbitrarily rejected proposed alternatives that would have allowed shareholders of each company to decide for that company whether to adopt a mechanism for shareholders' nominees to get access to proxy materials.

# A. CONSIDERATION OF ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES 

In the Adopting Release, the Commission predicted Rule 14a-11 would lead to "[d]irect cost savings" for shareholders in part due to "reduced printing and postage costs" and reduced expenditures for advertising compared to those of a "traditional" proxy contest. 75 Fed. Reg. at 56,756/2. The Commission also identified some intangible, or at least less readily quantifiable, benefits, principally that the rule "will mitigate collective action and free-rider concerns," which can discourage a shareholder from exercising his right to nominate a director in a traditional proxy contest, id., and "has the potential of creating the benefit of improved board performance and enhanced shareholder value," id. at 56,761/1. The Commission anticipated the rule would also impose costs upon companies and shareholders related to "the preparation of required disclosure, printing and mailing . . . , and [to] additional solicitations," id. at 56,768/3, and could have "adverse effects on company and board performance," id. at 56,764/3, for example, by distracting management, id. at 56,765/1. The Commission nonetheless concluded the rule would promote the "efficiency of the economy on the whole," and the benefits of the rule would "justify the costs" of the rule. Id. at 56,771/3.

The petitioners contend the Commission neglected both to quantify the costs companies would incur opposing shareholder nominees and to substantiate the rule's predicted benefits. They also argue the Commission failed to consider the consequences of union and state pension funds using the rule and failed properly to evaluate the frequency with which shareholders would initiate election contests.

# 1. Consideration of Costs and Benefits 

In the Adopting Release, the Commission recognized "company boards may be motivated by the issues at stake to expend significant resources to challenge shareholder director nominees." 75 Fed. Reg. at 56,770/2. Nonetheless, the Commission believed a company's solicitation and campaign costs "may be limited by two factors": first, "to the extent that the directors' fiduciary duties prevent them from using corporate funds to resist shareholder director nominations for no good-faith corporate purpose," they may decide "simply to include the shareholder director nominees . . . in the company's proxy materials"; and second, the "requisite ownership threshold and holding period" would "limit the number of shareholder director nominations that a board may receive, consider, and possibly contest." Id. at 56,770/2-3.

The petitioners object that the Commission failed to appreciate the intensity with which issuers would oppose nominees and arbitrarily dismissed the probability that directors would conclude their fiduciary duties required them to support their own nominees. The petitioners also argue it was arbitrary for the Commission not to estimate the costs of solicitation and campaigning that companies would incur to oppose candidates nominated by shareholders, which costs commenters expected to be quite large. The Chamber of Commerce submitted a comment predicting boards would incur substantial expenditures opposing shareholder nominees through "significant media and public relations efforts, advertising . . . , mass mailings, and other communication efforts, as well as the hiring of outside advisors and the expenditure of significant time and effort by the company's employees." Id. at 56,770/1. It pointed out that in recent proxy contests at larger companies costs "ranged from $14 million to $4 million" and at smaller companies "from $3 million to $800,000." Id. In its brief the Commission maintains it did consider the commenters' estimates of the costs, but reasonably explained why those costs "may prove less than these estimates."

We agree with the petitioners that the Commission's prediction directors might choose not to oppose shareholder nominees had no basis beyond mere speculation. Although it is possible that a board, consistent with its fiduciary duties, might forgo expending resources to oppose a shareholder nominee-for example, if it believes the cost of opposition would exceed the cost to the company of the board's preferred candidate losing the election, discounted by the probability of that happening - the Commission has presented no evidence that such forbearance is ever seen in practice. To the contrary, the American Bar Association Committee on Federal Regulation of Securities commented:


#### Abstract

If the [shareholder] nominee is determined [by the board] not to be as appropriate a candidate as those to be nominated by the board's independent nominating committee . . . then the board will be compelled by its fiduciary duty to make an appropriate effort to oppose the nominee, as boards now do in traditional proxy contests. Letter from Jeffrey W. Rubin, Chair, Comm. on Fed. Regulation of Secs., Am. Bar Ass'n, to SEC 35 (August 31, 2009), available at http://www.sec.gov /comments/s7-10-09/s71009-456.pdf.


The Commission's second point, that the required minimum amount and duration of share ownership will limit the number of directors nominated under the new rule, is a reason to expect election contests to be infrequent; it says nothing about the amount a company will spend on solicitation and campaign costs when there is a contested election. Although the Commission acknowledged that companies may expend resources to oppose shareholder nominees, see 75 Fed. Reg. at 56,770/2, it did nothing to estimate and quantify the costs it expected companies to incur; nor did it claim estimating those costs was not possible, for empirical evidence about expenditures in traditional proxy contests was readily available. Because the agency failed to "make tough choices about which of the competing estimates is most plausible, [or] to hazard a guess as to which is correct," Pub. Citizen, 374 F.3d at 1221, we believe it neglected its statutory obligation to assess the economic consequences of its rule, see Chamber of Commerce, 412 F.3d at 143.

The petitioners also maintain, and we agree, the Commission relied upon insufficient empirical data when it concluded that Rule 14a-11 will improve board performance and increase shareholder value by facilitating the election of dissidentshareholder nominees.... Moreover, as petitioners point out, the Commission discounted the costs of Rule 14a-11 -but not the benefits - as a mere artifact of the state law right of shareholders to elect directors. For example, with reference to the potential costs of Rule 14a-11, such as management distraction and reduction in the time a board spends "on strategic and long-term thinking," the Commission thought it "important to note that these costs are associated with the traditional State law right to nominate and elect directors, and are not costs incurred for including shareholder nominees for director in the company's proxy materials." Id. at 56,765/1-2. As we have said before, this type of reasoning, which fails to view a cost at the margin, is illogical and, in an economic analysis, unacceptable. See Chamber of Commerce, 412 F.3d at 143 (rejecting Commission's argument that rule would not create "costs associated with the hiring of staff because boards typically have this authority under state law," and assuming that "whether a board is authorized by law to hire additional staff in no way bears upon" the question whether the rule would "in fact cause the fund to incur additional staffing costs").

# 2. Shareholders with Special Interests 

The petitioners next argue the Commission acted arbitrarily and capriciously by "entirely fail[ing] to consider an important aspect of the problem," Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass'n, 463 U.S. at 43, to wit, how union and state pension funds might use Rule 14a-11.
Commenters expressed concern that these employee benefit funds would impose costs upon companies by using Rule 14a-11 as leverage to gain concessions, such as additional benefits for unionized employees, unrelated to shareholder value. The Commission insists it did consider this problem, albeit not in haec verba, along the way to its conclusion that "the totality of the evidence and economic theory" both indicate the rule "has the potential of creating the benefit of improved board performance and enhanced shareholder value." 75 Fed. Reg. at 56,761/1. Specifically, the Commission recognized "companies could be negatively affected if shareholders use the new rules to promote their narrow interests at the expense of other shareholders," id. at 56,772/3, but reasoned these potential costs "may be limited" because the ownership and holding requirements would "allow the use of the rule by only holders who demonstrated a significant, long-term commitment to the company," id. at 56,766/3, and who would therefore be less likely to act in a way that would diminish shareholder value. The Commission also noted costs may be limited because other shareholders may be alerted, through the disclosure requirements, "to the narrow interests of the nominating shareholder." Id.

The petitioners also contend the Commission failed to respond to the costs companies would incur even when a shareholder nominee is not ultimately elected. These costs may be incurred either by a board succumbing to the demands, unrelated to increasing value, of a special interest shareholder threatening to nominate a director, or by opposing and defeating such nominee(s). The Commission did not completely ignore these potential costs, but neither did it adequately address them. Notwithstanding the ownership and holding requirements, there is good reason to believe institutional investors with special interests will be able to use the rule and, as more than one commenter noted, "public and union pension funds" are the institutional investors "most likely to make use of proxy access." Letter from Jonathan D. Urick, Analyst, Council of Institutional Investors, to SEC 2 (January 14, 2010), available at http:// www.cii.org/UserFiles/file/resource%20center/correspondence/2010/1-14-10%20Proxy%20Access%20Comment%20Letter.pdf. Nonetheless, the Commission failed to respond to comments arguing that investors with a special interest, such as unions and state and local governments whose interests in jobs may well be greater than their interest in share value, can be expected to pursue self-interested objectives rather than the goal of maximizing shareholder value, and will likely cause companies to incur costs even when their nominee is unlikely to be elected. See, e.g., Detailed Comments of Business Roundtable on the Proposed Election Contest Rules and the Proposed Amendment to the Shareholder Proposal Rules 102 (August 17, 2009), available at http://businessroundtable.org/uploads/hearingsletters/downloads /BRT_Comment_Letter_to_SEC_on_File_No_S7-10-09.pdf ("state governments and labor unions . . . often appear to be driven by concerns other than a desire to increase the economic performance of the companies in which they invest'" (quoting Leo E. Strine, Jr., Toward a True Corporate Republic: A Traditionalist Response to Bebchuk's Solution for Improving Corporate America, 119 Harv. L. Rev. 1759, 1765 (2006))). By ducking serious evaluation of the costs that could be imposed upon companies from use of the rule by shareholders representing special interests, particularly union and government pension funds, we think the Commission acted arbitrarily.
# NOTES AND QUESTIONS 

1. Over the years, a number of administrative law doctrines have been developed to guide judicial review of agency rules including that a court reject agency rules that are "arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with law." The law in question in this case was a 1996 act that required the SEC to consider economic costs, which the panel ruled had not been done sufficiently. Separately, in Part II.A. 2 of the opinion, the Court took issue with another aspect of arbitrary or capricious: a court must ensure that the agency in question has "examine[d] the relevant data and articulate[d] a satisfactory explanation for its action including a 'rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.'" Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass'n v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983) (citing Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)). This is known as the "hard look doctrine," and it has been used by the Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit to invalidate rules that are not deemed to be well reasoned, including the SEC's proxy access rule. What could the SEC have done to satisfy the hard look doctrine in this case?
2. In the wake of the Business Roundtable decision, the SEC abandoned its proxy access rule. Before the opinion, both Delaware and the Model Business Corporation Act had added provisions authorizing bylaws that would require individuals nominated by a shareholder be included on the company proxy (see Delaware G.C.L. §112 and MBCA § 2.06(c)), and the SEC stated that it would permit shareholders to propose bylaw amendments via Rule 14a-8 that would provide for proxy access (seemingly giving a positive answer to a question posed in the previous section). The result of this policy change has been a torrent of proxy access bylaw amendments and shareholder proposals at U.S. public companies, reflecting support by institutional shareholder pressure. By the end of the 2018 proxy season, more than two-thirds of S\&P 500 companies had adopted proxy access. The typical bylaw resembles the SEC rule, allowing shareholders owning at least 3 percent of the company's stock for at least three years to submit candidates for a minority of the seats up for election. And yet in the first few years, only two companies faced investor attempts to use proxy access (one failed attempt at National Fuel Gas and one successful campaign at the Joint Corporation). However, proponents of proxy access argue that the existence of the right for shareholders to nominate directors more easily puts pressure on boards to do the right thing, even if the tool itself is rarely used.
3. In 2023, the SEC amended the federal proxy rules to require the use of a "universal proxy" card in corporate elections. Before the rule's adoption, shareholders who wished to challenge incumbent directors were required to send a separate proxy card listing only their own slate of nominees for the board, an expensive prospect. Not only that, shareholders could not mix and match nominees - they had to choose between incumbent management's card and the dissident's unless they attended the annual meeting in person.

Under the SEC's universal proxy rule, companies are now required to use a universal proxy card that lists all of the nominees from both sides. The rule is triggered when a dissident solicits 67 percent of a company's shareholders and complies with nomination procedures included in a company's bylaws. As a result of the rule, shareholders can select the nominees they favor in one place, regardless of who nominated them. Thus far, universal proxy has not led to a sea change in shareholder activism but appears instead to be driving an increase in settlements with dissident shareholders due to the unpredictability of elections under the new rules. Pat Tucker, What Settlement Data Says About the Evolution of Activism, Harv. L. Sch. F. on Corp. Governance (July 15, 2024).

# NOTE ON THE EXPANDING FEDERALLY DEFINED GOVERNANCE SPACE AND SAYON-PAY 

As this Business Roundtable case reveals, the federal government occasionally intervenes in corporate governance to change substantive rules. Since 2002, the government has intervened in several major pieces of legislation. Specifically, in the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (enacted in 2002 after the Enron and dot.com scandals) and the Dodd-Frank Act (enacted in 2010 after the financial crisis), Congress made the federal role in corporate governance more muscular. In particular, it went beyond the disclosure focus of the earlier statutes to impose substantive governance requirements:

- requiring that publicly held corporations have compensation and nomination committees on their board of directors and that independent directors compose these committees ( 15 U.S.C. §§78j-1,j-3 ) (requiring national securities exchanges to include such rules);
- requiring that public companies have internal accounting controls, as specified in federal statutes ( 15 U.S.C. §78j-1 );
- imposing claw-back mandates that public corporations recoup compensation from executives after particular financial events ( 15 U.S.C. §78j-4 ); and - specifying the corporations provide an advisory shareholder vote ("say-on-pay") on executive compensation ( 15 U.S.C. §78n-1 ).

The say-on-pay vote had its origins in a precatory shareholder proposal brought by the union fund AFSCME in the 2006 proxy season. While the proposal did not pass at any of the six companies it was brought, it received substantial shareholder support (averaging more than 40 percent approval), a surprising result for a first-time proposal.

A few years later, in the midst of public outrage about large executive pay packages at failing banks, the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 required all of the financial institutions participating in the federal government's Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) to include an advisory vote at their 2009 annual meeting of shareholders. By 2010, Dodd-Frank had memorialized this requirement for all listed companies, in response to public outcry about outsized pay at corporations across America.

Under the say-on-pay rules, listed companies must provide their shareholders with an advisory vote on the compensation of the most highly compensated executives. Say-on-pay votes must be held at least once every three years, and companies also are required to provide their shareholders with an advisory vote on how often they would like to be presented with say-on-pay votes - whether every year, every second year, or every third year.
In the first few years of say-on-pay, the average shareholder vote in favor of compensation plans was about 90 percent. Slicing the data a different way, more than three-quarters of larger companies garnered at least 90 percent approval, and in only about 2 percent of companies did the company fail to get at least a majority vote for its compensation plan. Importantly, there was a clear correlation between lower-than-average returns per share and higher-than-average CEO pay on the one hand and greater shareholder opposition to compensation plans on the other.

While it is unclear that say-on-pay has affected the level or trajectory of executive compensation, there are some indications of a broader effect on corporate governance more generally. Poor approval ratings for say-on-pay have sometimes reverberated in higher rates of withheld votes for director nominees in subsequent years. For example, directors who served on the compensation committee may be at higher risk in subsequent elections. Moreover, even if a compensation plan receives majority approval (sufficient to satisfy the practices described in the prior case study), there is some evidence that falling below even 80 percent can be a reason for concern and even departure from the board. In an example involving Hess Oil, when shareholders cast "only" 58 percent in favor of management's say-on-pay proposal, the vote was seen as a sign of shareholder unhappiness. A hedge fund launched a proxy contest for control of the company soon after, leading to a high-visibility proxy fight and a settlement in which the investor got several board seats and the CEO resigned as chair of the board. See Michael J. De La Merced, How Elliot and Hess Settled a Bitter Proxy Battle, N.Y. Times (May 16, 2013), http://dealbook.nytimes.com/2013/05/16/hess-and-elliot-settle-fight-over-companys-board/html. Therefore, say-on-pay has become an important part of the governance fabric of the public corporation.

# (5) CONTRACT AS AN EMERGING GOVERNANCE ALTERNATIVE 

In recent years, contracts between shareholders and a public corporation have emerged as a viable governance option. These are being utilized in two important settings: (1) by a founder as a substitute for using dual-class common stock to maintain control when going public; and (2) to implement a settlement between a company and activist shareholders who have sought changes in a company's policies or leadership. The principal case below confronts the use of a governance agreement to maintain control. The notes following this case detail how the Delaware legislature responded to this decision. As you read the case and the notes that follow, consider what is at stake in this decision, not only for the litigant in this case but also for Delaware's continued leadership in corporate governance.

## West Palm Beach Firefighters' Pension Fund v. Moelis \& Co. <br> Delaware Court of Chancery, 2024 <br> 311 A.3d 809

## Laster, V.C.

What happens when the seemingly irresistible force of market practice meets the traditionally immovable object of statutory law? A court must uphold the law, so the statute prevails.
The immovable statutory object is Section 141 (a) of the Delaware General Corporation Law (the "DGCL"). That provision famously states that "the business and affairs of every corporation organized under this chapter shall be managed by or under the direction of a board of directors, except as may be otherwise provided in this chapter or in its certificate of incorporation."

Section 141 (a) is the source of Delaware's board-centric model of corporate governance. The Delaware Supreme Court has cited Section 141 (a) repeatedly as the foundation of its jurisprudence:

- "A cardinal precept of the General Corporation Law of the State of Delaware is that directors, rather than shareholders, manage the business and affairs of the corporation."
- "The bedrock of the General Corporation Law of the State of Delaware is the rule that the business and affairs of a corporation are managed by and under the direction of its board."...

The presence of a stockholder who controls the corporation does not alter the board-centric framework. "[D]irector primacy remains the centerpiece of Delaware law, even when a controlling stockholder is present."

Internal corporate governance arrangements that do not appear in the charter and deprive boards of a significant portion of their authority contravene Section 141 (a). The Delaware courts have regularly considered challenges to contractual governance arrangements under Section 141 (a) and have frequently invalidated arrangements that improperly constrain a board's authority.

Crashing into this traditionally immovable object is the seemingly irresistible force of market practice. Corporate planners now regularly implement internal governance arrangements through stockholder agreements. The new wave of stockholder agreements does not involve stockholders contracting among themselves to address how they will exercise their stockholder-level rights. The new-wave agreements contain extensive veto rights and other restrictions on corporate action. ^10

The plaintiff challenges one such governance arrangement. Moelis \& Company (the "Company") is a global investment bank. Ken Moelis is its eponymous founder, CEO, and Chairman of the Board. After years of success operating the investment bank as a private entity, Moelis decided to raise capital from the public markets. He created the Company as a new holding company and reorganized the bank's underlying entity structure. One day before the Company's shares began trading publicly, Moelis, three of his affiliates, and the Company entered into a stockholder agreement (the "Stockholder Agreement").

The Stockholder Agreement is a new-wave agreement. Under its terms, the Company's board of directors (the "Board") must obtain Moelis' prior written consent before taking eighteen different categories of action (the "Pre-Approval Requirements"). The Pre-Approval Requirements encompass virtually everything the Board can do. Because of the Pre-Approval Requirements, the Board can only act if Moelis signs off in advance.

Another set of provisions compels the Board to ensure that Moelis can select a majority of its members (collectively, the "Board Composition Provisions"). The Board is contractually obligated to maintain its size at not more than eleven seats (the "Size Requirement"). Moelis is entitled to name a number of designees equal to a majority of those seats (the "Designation Right"). The Board must nominate Moelis' designees as candidates for election (the "Nomination Requirement"). The Board must recommend that stockholders vote in favor of Moelis' designees (the "Recommendation Requirement"). The Company must use reasonable efforts to enable Moelis' designees to be elected and continue to serve (the "Efforts Requirement"). And the Board must fill any vacancy in a seat occupied by a Moelis designee with a new Moelis designee (the "Vacancy Requirement"). Even if Moelis holds less than a majority of the Company's outstanding voting power, as is currently true, the Board Composition Provisions force the directors to ensure that his designees control the Board.

A final provision in the Stockholder Agreement forces the Board to populate any committee with a number of Moelis' designees proportionate to the number of designees on the full Board (the "Committee Composition Provision"). Because of the Committee Composition Provision, the Board cannot create a committee with a different number of Moelis designees unless Moelis consents. The Board cannot create an independent committee without any Moelis designees unless Moelis consents.

The plaintiff is a Company stockholder who contends that the Pre-Approval Requirements, the Board Composition Provisions, and the Committee Composition Provision (collectively, the "Challenged Provisions") violate Section 141 (a). He contends that the Committee Composition Provision also violates Section 141 (c). . . .
. . . The plaintiff advances a straightforward argument. Under Chancellor Seitz's seminal decision in Abercrombie v. Davies, governance restrictions violate Section 141 (a) when they "have the effect of removing from directors in a very substantial way their duty to use their own best judgment on management matters" or "tend[ ] to limit in a substantial way the freedom of director decisions on matters of management policy. . . "12 The Delaware Supreme Court has repeatedly endorsed the Abercrombie test. This court has repeatedly applied it.

The plaintiff says the Challenged Provisions fail that test. . . .
[Importantly], Moelis did not have to frame an internal corporate governance arrangement using the Stockholder Agreement. He could have accomplished the vast majority of what he wanted through the Company's certificate of incorporation (the "Charter"). Even now, the Board could implement many of the Challenged Provisions by using its blank check authority to issue Moelis preferred stock carrying a set of voting rights and director appointment rights. A new class of preferred stock need not upset the Company's equity allocation; it could consist of a single golden share. The certificate of designations for the new preferred stock would become part of the Charter as a matter of law. At that point, because the provisions would appear in the Charter, they would comply with Section 141 (a). ^19 Although some might find it bizarre that the DGCL would prohibit one means of accomplishing a goal while allowing another, that is what the doctrine of independent legal significance contemplates. . . .

# I. Factual Background . . . 

## A. THE COMPANY AND ITS IPO

In 2007, Moelis formed a new boutique investment bank. He ran the business as CEO and Chairman of the Board. The bank enjoyed immediate success and expanded globally. By 2013, it was generating over $400 million in annual revenue.

In 2014, Moelis decided to raise capital by selling shares to the public. Before the IPO, he transferred the bank's business to a newly formed Delaware limited partnership named Moelis \& Company Group LP (the "Group"). The Group issued general partner units and Class A limited partnership units.

Moelis formed the Company to be the new publicly traded entity. The Company owns all of the member interests in an LLC that serves as the general partner of the Group. The Company also owns Class A units that give it a 27% economic interest in the Group.


Some transactions, like mergers, require a specific sequence of events in which the board initiates action, then the stockholders vote. E.g., 8 Del. C. § 251. It is unclear whether a charter provision could require a stockholder's pre-approval, before the board could act. See, e.g., Blades v. Wischart, 2010 WL 4638603, at *11 n. 91 (Del. Ch. Nov. 17, 2010); iXCore, S.A.S. v. Triton Imaging, Inc., 2005 WL 1653942, at *1 n. 7 (Del. Ch. July 8, 2005); Tansey v. Trade Show News Networks, Inc., 2001 WL 1526306, at *4 (Del. Ch. Nov. 27, 2001). A class-based voting right on a merger, if drafted properly, would be viable. Elliott Assocs., L.P. v. Avatex Corp., 715 A.2d 843, 854 (Del. 1998). Regardless, those issues are for another day.
Moelis allocated the other 73% of the Class A units to Moelis \& Company Partner Holdings LP ("Holdings"). Moelis and other bankers and employees own the equity in Holdings. Moelis controls Holdings.

The Company has two authorized classes of common stock. In its IPO, the Company issued shares of its Class A common stock to the public, and those shares trade on the New York Stock Exchange. The Class A shares carry one vote per share.

Only Holdings received Class B common stock. The Class B shares carry ten votes per share as long as Moelis [maintains directly or indirectly beneficial ownership of at least 4,458,445 shares of Class A Stock and at least 5 percent of the issued and outstanding Class A Common Stock; has not been convicted of a criminal violation; is not deceased; and has not had his employment agreement terminated because of a breach of his covenant to devote his primary business time and efforts to the business . . . ].

That set of conditions is known as the "Class B Condition."

# B. THE STOCKHOLDER AGREEMENT 

In the prospectus for the IPO, the Company disclosed that Moelis and the Company would enter into the Stockholder Agreement. On April 15, 2014, one day before the Class A shares began trading, the Company, Moelis, Holdings, and two other Moelis affiliates executed the Stockholder Agreement. No one disputes that investors who purchased stock in the IPO had notice of the Stockholder Agreement.

The Stockholder Agreement remains in effect as long as a modified version of the Class B Condition is satisfied. Known as the "Secondary Class B Condition," the requirements are the same as the Class B Condition, except that [Moelis' ownership cannot drop below] 2,229,222. If the Secondary Class B Condition fails, then the Stockholder Agreement terminates.

The Stockholder Agreement grants Moelis expansive rights. Technically, the Stockholder Agreement allocates many of the rights to Holdings, but because Moelis controls Holdings, Moelis controls those rights. For simplicity, this decision refers to Moelis, rather than Holdings, as being able to exercise those rights. The plaintiff challenges the Pre-Approval Requirements, the Board Composition Provisions, and the Committee Composition Provision.

## 1. The Pre-Approval Requirements

The Stockholder Agreement contains the Pre-Approval Requirements. The pertinent language states:

So long as the Class B Condition is satisfied, the Board shall not authorize, approve or ratify any of the following actions or any plan with respect thereto without the prior approval (which approval may be in the form of an action by written consent) of [Moelis]:
(i) any incurrence of indebtedness . . . in excess of $20 million;
(ii) any issuance of . . . equity . . .;
(iii) the issuance of any preferred stock;
(iv) any . . . investment . . . of . . . equity or debt . . . in an amount greater than $20 million;
(v) . . . a new line of business that requires an investment in excess of $20 million;
(vi) the adoption of a stockholder rights plan by the Company; . . .
(viii) any amendment to the Certificate of Incorporation or By-Laws;
(ix) any amendment to the Partnership LP Agreement;
(x) the renaming of the Company;
(xi) the adoption of the Company's annual budget . . . ;
(xii) ... payment of any dividend . . . ;
(xiii) ... any merger . . . or similar transaction involving the Company . . .;
(xiv) [any voluntary] dissolution . . . or similar action . . . . . . or (xviii) changes to the Company's taxable year or fiscal year. 29
Viewed in their totality, the Pre-Approval Requirements mean that the Board must get Moelis' signoff in advance for virtually any action the directors might want to take.

# 2. The Board Composition Provisions 

As long as the Class B Condition is satisfied, the Board Composition Provisions give Moelis the right to determine the size of the Board and select a majority of the directors who serve on it. There are six Board Composition Provisions: the Size Requirement, the Designation Right, the Nomination Requirement, the Recommendation Requirement, the Efforts Requirement, and the Vacancy Requirement. . . .

## 3. The Committee Composition Provision

As long as the Stockholder Agreement remains in effect, the Committee Composition Provision gives Moelis the right to have a proportionate number of his designees serve on any board committee. . . .

Currently, Moelis has the right to designate a majority of the Board, so the Committee Composition Provision requires that every committee have a majority of Moelis designees. Without Moelis' consent, the Board cannot create a committee with a lesser number of Moelis designees. The Board cannot create a committee of nonMoelis designees.

## C. MOELIS' OWNERSHIP DECLINES AFTER THE IPO

After the IPO, Moelis controlled 96.8% of the Company's outstanding voting power. Since the IPO, Moelis has sold off stock, and his voting power has declined. In February 2021, his voting power fell below 50%, causing the Company to no longer qualify as a controlled company under New York Stock Exchange rules. The Company changed the membership of its Board and committees to comply with the rules for non-controlled companies. Moelis is still entitled to designate a majority of the Board, but he waived that right in 2021, 2022, and 2023 to ensure compliance with the rules for non-controlled companies.

Presently, Moelis owns approximately 6.5% of the outstanding equity and possesses the right to obtain additional shares that would bring his equity interest to 11.5%. The Class B Condition therefore continues to be satisfied. Because Moelis continues to beneficially own all the Company's Class B stock, his voting power currently stands at 40.4%. . .
# II. Legal Analysis . . . 

## A. THE ELEMENTS OF A SECTION 141 (a) CLAIM

The plaintiff contends that the Challenged Provisions violate Section 141 (a) of the DGCL. To reiterate, that section states: "The business and affairs of every corporation organized under this chapter shall be managed by or under the direction of a board of directors, except as may be otherwise provided in this chapter or in its certificate of incorporation." To succeed on a facial challenge, the plaintiff must show that the Challenged Provisions cannot operate lawfully in the face of Section 141 (a) "under any circumstances." . . .

Delaware decisions regularly recognize that ordinary commercial contracts do not raise Section 141 (a) concerns. . . .

What has proved elusive is some method of distinguishing invalid restrictions on board authority from valid exercises in contracting. But a careful review of the Section 141 (a) canon reveals a clear rule. Although none of the Section 141 (a) cases say so expressly, the decisions distinguish between external commercial agreements and provisions that seek to govern the corporation's internal affairs. All of the successful Section 141 (a) challenges have involved contracts or provisions tied to a corporation's internal affairs. . . .

The decisions also show the types of restrictions that can violate Section 141 (a). The cases consistently invalidate provisions that purport to bind the board or individual directors explicitly. This decision refers to those as direct, board-level restrictions.

A direct, board-level restriction targets the board itself or a director. But if Section 141 (a) only applied to those restrictions, then corporate planners could circumvent the statute by specifying that a provision imposed an obligation on the corporation. . . .

Restrictions can also operate indirectly by imposing consequences for particular action. . . .Or, in rare circumstances, a contract could impose consequences on the corporation that are so onerous that a board could not risk triggering them. The consequences must be extreme, because the ordinary consequences of breach do not implicate Section 141 (a). This decision calls those restrictions, respectively, indirect board-level restrictions and indirect, corporate-level restrictions. . . .

## 1. The Decisions . . .

a. Stockholder and Director Agreements . . .

## i. Abercrombie

The cornerstone of the contemporary Section 141 (a) canon is Abercrombie. The corporation had ten stockholders, and all ten entered into a stockholder agreement shortly after the corporation was formed. That agreement gave them each the right to designate a number of directors proportionate to their ownership stake and bound each to vote for the resulting slate. . . .

Chancellor Seitz concluded: "So long as the corporate form is used as presently provided by our statutes this Court cannot give legal sanction to agreements which have the effect of removing from directors in a very substantial way their duty to use their own best judgment on management matters." The Voting Provision was "invalid as an unlawful attempt by certain stockholders to encroach upon the statutory powers and duties imposed on directors by the Delaware corporation law."

The Abercrombie decision offers three powerful lessons. First, a provision in a stockholder agreement can violate Section 141 (a). Second, a direct board-level restriction is invalid, as shown by the ruling about how the Voting Provision applied to Davies. Third, an indirect board-level restriction is also invalid, as shown by the ruling about how the Voting Provision applied to the other directors. . . .

# 2. Lessons from the Decisions . . . 

[In sum,] the review of Section 141 (a) decisions reveals a two-step inquiry. . . .
. . . Initially, a court must determine whether the challenged provision is part of an internal governance arrangement [rather than an external commercial arrangement]. If not, then the inquiry ends. If so, then the court must apply the Abercrombie test to determine whether the provision imposes a restriction that violates Section 141(a). . .

## c. The Role of Stockholder Agreements

Under these standards, stockholder agreements are fertile ground for Section 141 (a) violations. Section 218(c) of the DGCL authorizes "[a]n agreement between 2 or more stockholders, if in writing and signed by the parties thereto, may provide that in exercising any voting rights, the shares held by them shall be voted as provided by the agreement, or as the parties may agree, or as determined in accordance with a procedure agreed upon by them." The DGCL thus expressly authorizes stockholders to enter into agreements about how they will exercise their voting rights. The statute also states that its terms "shall not be deemed to invalidate any voting or other agreement among stockholders. . . ." The statute does not greenlight governance provisions that appear in stockholder agreements rather than in the charter.

Once parties to a stockholder agreement start addressing governance issues, they can easily move beyond agreements about allocating rights appurtenant to their shares and transition to internal governance issues. To the extent the agreement purports to allocate authority among or impose restraints on intra-corporate actors, it is part of the internal entity contract and subject to Section 141 (a). A court must therefore analyze the specific provisions.

Stockholder agreements are also challenging because they can accomplish both more and less than other components of the corporate hierarchy. In one sense, stockholder agreements can accomplish more because "when stockholders enter into agreements about how they will exercise stockholder-level rights, . . [the] individual owners are bargaining over their private property." To that end, the DGCL authorizes stockholders to agree to greater constraints on their fundamental rights to sell and vote in a stockholder agreement - than a corporation can impose in its charter or bylaws.

In another sense, however, stockholder agreements cannot achieve as much as higher components in the corporate hierarchy, and stockholder agreements often fall short when parties try. "A share of stock represents a bundle of rights defined by the laws of the chartering state and the corporation's certificate of incorporation and bylaws." Under the corporate hierarchy, the DGCL, the charter, and the bylaws establish the rights that stockholders possess. If the stockholder-level agreement binds the stockholders as to how they exercise those rights, then there is no conflict with any higher component. But if a stockholder agreement purports to alter or ignore the structure that the higher-level components created, then the effort is ineffective, and the higher-level component prevails. Similarly, if a stockholder agreement attempts to alter an internal governance structure that either the DGCL mandates or which can only be altered through the charter or bylaws, then the attempt will be ineffective.

These principles point to a simple test for determining when a provision in a stockholder agreement is not subject to Section 141 (a): Does the contractual provision address an action that a stockholder individually or a group of stockholders collectively could take? If yes, then a stockholder can contract over that action in advance, without risking any violation of the corporate hierarchy. The stockholder gets to choose whether to exercise those rights and can agree contractually to constrain its exercise of those rights.

If a stockholder agreement tries to do more, than the corporate hierarchy and Section 141 (a) may invalidate the attempt. "[S]tockholders of a corporation subject to the DGCL may not directly manage the business and affairs of the corporation, at least without specific authorization in either the statute or the certificate of incorporation." A provision in a stockholder agreement that purports to enable stockholders to manage the business and affairs of a corporation is invalid.

# B. THE CHALLENGED PROVISIONS ARE PART OF AN INTERNAL GOVERNANCE ARRANGEMENT 

For reasons already discussed, the Section 141 (a) inquiry starts by asking whether the challenged provisions are part of an internal governance arrangement as opposed to an external commercial agreement. On that spectrum, the Challenged Provisions fall on the governance side of the line.

First, a governance arrangement generally is tied to a section of the DGCL and a role in regulating the corporation's internal affairs. Here, the Challenged Provisions appear in the Stockholder Agreement, which is grounded in Section 218 of the DGCL. The Stockholder Agreement self-evidently regulates the Company's internal affairs. It was part of Moelis' effort to reorganize his business for life as a public corporation. That effort included creating the Company, inserting bespoke provisions into the Charter, and adopting a set of bylaws (the "Bylaws") that reflected those arrangements. Not surprisingly, the Challenged Provisions look like the type of governance arrangements that would appear in a charter or a certificate of designations as rights appurtenant to preferred stock. Versions of the Challenged Provisions could have gone in the Charter. Moelis simply put them in the Stockholder Agreement.

Second, a governance arrangement generally involves intra-corporate actors. Here, all of the Company's counterparties are intra-corporate actors. The only parties to the Stockholder Agreement are the Company, Moelis, and three of his affiliates. Moelis is the Company's founder, CEO, and Chairman. In substance, the Stockholder Agreement is a bilateral agreement between the Company and Moelis.
Third, the Challenged Provisions attempt to govern how internal corporate actors authorize the exercise of corporate power. . . .

The Challenged Provisions are prototypical governance provisions in a prototypical governance agreement. As such, they are part of the Company's internal governance arrangement. Even though they appear in a separate contract, they are subject to Section 141 (a).

# C. THE FACIAL CHALLENGE TO THE PRE-APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS . . . 

## 1. The Pre-Approval Requirements Restrict the Board

Under Abercrombie, governance restrictions violate Section 141 (a) when they "have the effect of removing from directors in a very substantial way their duty to use their own best judgment on management matters" or "tend[ ] to limit in a substantial way the freedom of director decisions on matters of management policy. . . ." The Pre-Approval Requirements are explicit and direct limitations on the Board's ability to take action. The pertinent provisions do not impose obligations or restrictions on the Company, with the Company potentially answerable in damages for breach. The provisions purport to bind and constrain the Board. The introductory language states: "So long as the Class B Condition is satisfied, the Board shall not authorize, approve or ratify any of the following actions or any plan with respect thereto without the prior approval (which approval may be in the form of an action by written consent) of [Moelis]." The Pre-Approval Requirements are direct, board-level constraints. . . .

In an effort to blunt the significance of the Pre-Approval Requirements, the Company represents that Moelis has never exercised them, but that does not defeat the plaintiff's facial challenge. Instead, that is powerful evidence that the Pre-Approval Requirements have a chilling effect. The Stockholder Agreement has been in place for a decade. Think of the myriad issues that the Company has confronted over those years. Yet Moelis and the Board have never disagreed?

The best deterrents are never used. Knowing the deterrent exists, those who are deterred don't test the limits. Happily, the Cold War ended without the United States or its adversary launching a nuclear weapon. The fact that our presidents never used the Gold Codes does not mean that our nuclear triad had no effect. Quite the opposite. . . .
. . . In fact, the Pre-Approval Requirements are more pernicious than the Voting Provision in Abercrombie, because they expressly require Moelis' prior approval before the Board can act. In Abercrombie, the directors other than Davies only faced the threat of removal after the fact.

The Pre-Approval Requirements are so all-encompassing as to render the Board an advisory body. Moelis, not the Company, is running the show. The directors can only act to the extent Moelis lets them. The Pre-Approval Requirements have the effect of removing from the directors in a very substantial way their duty to use their own best judgment on virtually every management matter. They are therefore facially invalid under the Abercrombie test.
# 2. The Pre-Approval Requirements Cannot Operate Legitimately 

The Company also contends that the plaintiff's facial challenge fails because Pre-Approval Requirements can operate legitimately. According to the Company, so long as Moelis does not invoke them, there is no Section 141 (a) problem.

That argument fails initially because it ignores the deterrent effect of the Pre-Approval Requirements. As discussed in the prior section, the Pre-Approval Requirements loom in the background, forcing the directors to operate at all times in their shadow. The existence of the Pre-Approval Requirements always and necessarily inhibits the exercise of board power.

Setting aside the deterrent effect, the Company argues that the provisions do not formally constrain the Board as long as Moelis and the directors agree. But from that formalistic standpoint, agreement makes Pre-Approval Requirements superfluous. There is no need to enforce contractual restrictions when the counterparty is already doing what you want. The only setting when Moelis would need to enforce one of the Pre-Approval Requirements is if the Board was committed to taking action that Moelis rejected. In every setting where Moelis enforces one of the Pre-Approval Requirements, the provision will operate invalidly to constrain the Board. There is never a time that Moelis could enforce a Pre-Approval Requirement and not have it constitute a Section 141 (a) violation.

A similar dynamic existed in AFSCME, where stockholders sought to adopt a bylaw that would require the board to reimburse proxy contest expenses under specific settings. If the board decided to reimburse the expenses on its own initiative, then the proposed bylaw was superfluous. The bylaw only operated to force board action in a setting where the board had decided that the proxy expenses should not be reimbursed. The bylaw therefore could not operate validly and was contrary to Delaware law.

There is no setting in which the Pre-Approval Requirements can operate validly. The facial challenge to the Pre-Approval Requirements therefore succeeds.

## D. THE FACIAL CHALLENGE TO THE BOARD COMPOSITION PROVISIONS

The plaintiff next mounts a facial challenge to the Board Composition Provisions, which seek to constrain the size and composition of the Board. The Board Composition Provisions are therefore part of a governance arrangement to which Section 141 (a) applies.

There are six Board Composition Provisions: the Size Requirement, the Designation Right, the Nomination Requirement, the Recommendation Requirement, the Efforts Requirement, and the Vacancy Requirement. The Recommendation Requirement, the Vacancy Requirement, and the Size Requirement violate the Abercrombie test, cannot operate legitimately, and are facially invalid. The Designation Right, the Nomination Requirement, and the Efforts Requirement can operate legitimately and so are not facially invalid.
# E. THE FACIAL CHALLENGE TO THE COMMITTEE COMPOSITION PROVISION 

Finally, the plaintiff mounts a facial challenge to the Committee Composition Provision. That provision is invalid under Section 141 (a) and Section 141 (c) (2).

As with the other facially invalid requirements, the Committee Composition Provision cannot operate legitimately. If the Board voluntarily populates a committee with a proportionate number of Moelis' designees, then the provision is not doing any work. The Committee Composition Provision only comes into play when Moelis and the Board disagree, at which point the provision prevents the Board from exercising its statutory authority. The Committee Composition Provision is therefore facially invalid.

## F. THE POLICY ARGUMENTS

To defend the Challenged Provisions, the Company advances a series of policy arguments. This case does not call for a public policy analysis. When the General Assembly has enacted a statute, that statute embodies Delaware's public policy. A court is not free to disregard it. . . .

Next, the Company argues that many companies have stockholder agreements containing similar provisions. The Company also points out that settlement agreements resolving proxy contests with activist investors often contain provisions resembling the Board Composition Provisions.

This case does not involve an activist settlement agreement. Any Section 141 (a) challenge to a provision in an activist settlement agreement would depend on what the provision said. A provision that resembled the Designation Right, the Nomination Requirement, or the Efforts Requirement would likely pass muster. A provision that resembled the Recommendation Requirement, the Vacancy Requirement, or the Size Requirement could be problematic, particularly if, as here, the provisions purported to bind directors irrespective of future events. But any Section 141 (a) assessment of provisions in an activist settlement agreement must await an appropriate case.

The Company is correct that other corporations have entered into similar stockholder agreements with favored internal actors. To date, the number of companies using this structure remains low relative to the total number of companies in the market. Ruling on the validity of these provisions now will not be overly disruptive, particularly when statutorily permissible alternatives exist. Instead, addressing the issue now is important because Professor Rauterberg has uncovered a trend. Corporate planners have increasingly turned to stockholder agreements as a means of allowing favored stockholders to maintain control, even at levels where their stock ownership would not support a control finding. A standard strategy involves baking in a stockholder agreement containing governance rights when setting up a company for an IPO. That enables the pre-IPO stockholders who are parties to the agreement to sell down over time, while relying on the stockholder agreement to maintain control. If that strategy violates Section 141 (a), then it would be good for corporate planners to know that sooner, rather than later, so they can deploy alternative structures.

In any event, market practice is not law. Delaware courts consider market practice, because market practice can reflect the judgments of experienced counsel about what is possible under Delaware law. But corporate lawyers are marvelous mimics. And clients pay corporate lawyers to push the envelope. When the General Assembly has enacted a statute, a court's job is to enforce the statute, even if that has implications for market practice.

As its ace in the hole, the Company appeals to private ordering. According to the Company, the court should uphold the Challenged Provisions because of "Delaware's general commitment to safeguarding 'freedom of contract' and its 'policy of enforcing the voluntary agreements of sophisticated parties in commerce.'" Even private ordering has its limits. "Corporate law, unlike contract law, is not susceptible to near-infinite customization."

As the Delaware Supreme Court recently reiterated, "[o]nly a strong showing that dishonoring [a] contract is required to vindicate a public policy interest even stronger than freedom of contract will induce our courts to ignore unambiguous contractual undertakings." Section 141 (a) embodies just such a policy interest. It imposes Delaware's board-centric governance model on every corporation, "except as may be otherwise provided in this chapter or in its certificate of incorporation." Delaware law permits and even encourages private ordering. But when restricting the board's authority, the tailoring must take place in the charter. . . .

# III. CONCLUSION 

When market practice meets a statute, the statute prevails. Market participants must conform their conduct to legal requirements, not the other way around. Of course, the General Assembly could enact a provision stating what stockholder agreements can do. Unless and until it does, the statute controls. . . .

## NOTES AND QUESTIONS

1. Vice Chancellor Laster noted that Moelis could have accomplished most if not all of his governance wish list via traditional mechanisms. See footnote 19 and accompanying text. Why do you think Moelis and his advisors chose a stockholder agreement instead of one or more of the devices Laster detailed?
2. Vice Chancellor Laster invited the Delaware legislature to provide more clarity as to what could be accomplished in a stockholder agreement. See footnote 341 and Opinion Conclusion. He assumed that such changes would be accomplished via amendment to Delaware G.C.L. § 218. The legislature took up Laster's invitation with alacrity. To the chagrin and alarm of many legal scholars, the legislation amended Delaware G.C.L. §122 rather than §218, and acted without waiting for Supreme Court review of Laster's opinion. The principal change is set out in new subpart (18) of §122 :
§ 122. Specific Powers Every Corporation Created Under This Chapter Shall Have Power To . . .
(18) Notwithstanding §141 (a) of this title, make contracts with one or more current or prospective stockholders (or one or more beneficial owners of stock), in its or their capacity as such, in exchange for such minimum consideration as determined by the board of directors (which may include inducing stockholders or beneficial owners of stock to take, or refrain from taking, one or more actions); provided that no provision of such contract shall be enforceable against the corporation to the extent such contract provision is contrary to the certificate of incorporation or would be contrary to the laws of this State (other than §115 of this title) if included in the certificate of incorporation. Without limiting the provisions that may be included in any such contracts, the corporation may agree to: (a) restrict or prohibit itself from taking actions specified in the contract, (b) require the approval or consent of one or more persons or bodies before the corporation may take actions specified in the contract (which persons or bodies may include the board of directors or one or more current or future directors, stockholders or beneficial owners of stock of the corporation), and (c) covenant that the corporation or one or more persons or bodies will take, or refrain from taking, actions specified in the contract (which persons or bodies may include the board of directors or one or more current or future directors, stockholders or beneficial owners of stock of the corporation). Solely for purposes of applying the proviso in the first sentence of this subsection, a restriction, prohibition or covenant in any such contract that relates to any specified action shall not be deemed contrary to the laws of this State or the certificate of incorporation by reason of a provision of this title or the certificate of incorporation that authorizes or empowers the board of directors (or any one or more directors) to take such action. With respect to all contracts made under this subsection, the corporation shall be subject to the remedies available under the law governing the contract, including for any failure to perform or comply with its agreements under such contract.

What path remains to challenge a shareholder agreement in Delaware court?
3. The use of contract as a governance device plays a significant role in nonpublicly traded business associations to address the problem of illiquidity and the inadequacy of default governance rules that would otherwise apply. You will see extensive coverage of this topic in Chapters 8 and 9.

[^0]: 2. Under Sections (i) (1) and (i) (2) of SEC Rule 14a-8, a company may exclude a stockholder proposal from its proxy statement if the proposal "is not a proper subject for action by the shareholders under the laws of the jurisdiction of the company's organization," or where the proposal, if implemented, "would cause the company to violate any state law to which it is subject." See 17 C.F.R. $240.14a-8.
[^0]: 8. Lawrence A. Hamermesh, Corporate Democracy and Stockholder-Adopted By-Laws: Taking Back the Street? 73 Tul. L. Rev. 409, 444 (1998)....
[^0]: 14. We do not attempt to delineate the location of that bright line in this Opinion. What we do hold is case specific; that is, wherever may be the location of the bright line that separates the shareholders' bylaw-making power under Section 109 from the directors' exclusive managerial authority under Section 141 (a), the proposed Bylaw at issue here does not invade the territory demarcated by Section 141 (a).
[^0]: 15. Hollinger Intern., Inc. v. Black, 844 A.2d 1022, 1078-79 (Del. Ch. 2004) (internal footnotes omitted), aff'd, 872 A. 2d559 (Del. 2005). . . .
[^0]: 22. Harrah's Entm't v. JCC: Holding Co., 802 A.2d 294, 311 (Del. Ch. 2002) (quoting Durkin v. Nat'l Bank of Olyphant, 772 F.2d 55, 59 (3d Cir. 1985)).
[^0]: 32. Only if the Bylaw provision were enacted as an amendment to CA's Certificate of Incorporation would that distinction be dispositive. See 8 Del. C. §102 (b) (1) and §242.
[^0]: 2. Paté de foie gras is made from the liver of geese. According to Mr. Lovenheim's affidavit, force-feeding is frequently used in order to expand the liver and thereby produce a larger quantity of paté. Mr. Lovenheim's affidavit also contains a description of the force-feeding process:
[^0]: 8. The assertion that the proposal is significant in an ethical and social sense relies on plaintiff's argument that "the very availability of a market for products that may be obtained through the inhumane force-feeding of geese cannot help but contribute to the continuation of such treatment." Plaintiff's brief characterizes the humane treatment of animals as among the foundations of western culture and cites in support of this view the Seven Laws of Noah, an animal protection statute enacted by the Massachusetts Bay Colony in 1641, numerous federal statutes enacted since 1877, and animal protection laws existing in all fifty states and the District of Columbia. An additional indication of the significance of plaintiff's proposal is the support of such leading organizations in the field of animal care as the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals and The Humane Society of the United States for measures aimed at discontinuing use of force-feeding.
[^0]: 9. See Comment, The 1983 Amendments to Shareholder Proposal Rule 14a-8: A Retreat from Corporate Democracy?, 59 Tulane L. Rev. 161, 183-184 (1984) (hereinafter "Comment, 1983 Amendments").
[^0]: 15. The Court defined the purpose of §14 (a) of assuring that shareholders exercise their right "to control the important decisions which affect them in their capacity as stockholders and owners of the corporation." 432 F. 2 d at 680-681.
[^0]: 10. See Gabriel Rauterberg, The Separation of Voting and Control: The Role of Contract in Corporate Governance, 38 Yale J. Reg. 1124, 1148-54 (2021) (documenting trend of public companies being subject to stockholder agreements that provide various species of control rights to favored investors); id. at 1135 (observing that contemporary shareholder agreements "commonly grant shareholders the right to nominate directors to the board and render that right effective through voting agreements among shareholders who commit to vote for each other's nominees," "grant specific parties-sometimes minority shareholders-veto rights over a range of major corporate policy decisions, such as whether to fire the CEO, effect a change of control, or change lines of business," "waive major shareholders' obligations to present corporate opportunities to the firm, which the fiduciary duty of loyalty would otherwise require, and they sometimes, though more rarely, restrict the ability of shareholders to sell their shares through tag-along rights (granting one party the right to sell their stock to a bidder on the same terms the other party is being offered), drag-along rights (obligating one party to sell their stock if another party chooses to)," and contain other rights and restrictions); see also Jill E. Fisch, Stealth Governance: Shareholder Agreements and Private Ordering, 99 Wash. U. L. Rev. 913, 930-33, 946-53 (2021) (discussing similar trend in private companies).
[^0]: 12. Abercrombie v. Davies, 123 A.2d 893, 899 (Del. Ch. 1956), rev'd on other grounds, 130 A.2d 338 (Del. 1957).
[^0]: 19. That said, Moelis may not be able to get everything he wanted. Even a charter provision cannot override a mandatory feature of the DGCL. E.g., Rohe v. Reliance Training Network, Inc., 2000 WL 1038190, at *10-11 (Del. Ch. July 21, 2000) (holding that provisions in a certificate of incorporation could not specify directors in advance, provide permanent tenure for directors, or limit the right to remove directors in ways inconsistent with 8 Del. C. §141(k) ); Loew's Theatres, Inc. v. Com. Credit Co., 243 A. 2d78,81 (Del. Ch. 1968) (holding that a charter provision that limited the right to inspect the corporation's books and records to holders of 25% or more of the corporation's stock violated 8 Del. C. §220, which gives that right to "any" stockholder). This court has indicated that some restrictions on board action could be invalid even if they appear in the charter. See Jones Apparel Gp., Inc. v. Maxwell Shue Co., 883 A. 2d837,852 (Del. Ch. 2004) (suggesting, without ruling on subject, that charter-based limitations on the board's ability to address charter amendments or mergers could be suspect).