
## i. The Evolution of Patent Claiming: From Central Claims to Peripheral Claims

The practice of claiming inventions, as opposed to merely describing them, traces back to the early nineteenth century. See J. Jonas Anderson \& Peter S. Menell, Informal Deference: A Historical, Empirical, and Normative Analysis of Patent Claim Construction, 108 Nw. U. L. Rev. 1, 8-21 (2014). Historians credit Robert Fulton, developer of the first commercially successful steamboat, with "inventing" the patent claim. See Karl B. Lutz, Evolution of the Claims of U.S. Patents, 20 J. Pat. Off. Soc'y 134, 137 (1938). His 1811 patent stated:

Having been the first to demonstrate the superior advantages of a water wheel or wheels, I claim as my exclusive right, the use of two wheels, one over each side of the boat to take the purchase on the water . . . .
See also Camilla A. Hrdy, State Patent Laws in the Age of Laissez Faire, 28 BerkeleY TECH. L.J. 45, 78 (2013) (describing patent-like right granted to Fulton by New York State, and subsequent litigation). Although there were sporadic examples in the first two decades of the nineteenth century of patents expressly claiming inventions, such explicit claiming was not the general practice.

Justice Joseph Story, who would emerge as the leading patent jurist of the first half of the nineteenth century, immediately came to see the problems with vague and conclusory descriptions of inventions. Sitting in his first patent case (and the first case to focus on the question of distinguishing a patented invention from the prior art), he noted the "intrinsic difficulty . . . to ascertain . . . the exact boundaries between what was known and used before, and what is new." See Whittemore v. Cutter, 29 F. Cas. 1123, 1124 (C.C.D. Mass. 1813) (No. 17,601); see also Odiorne v. Winkley, 18 F. Cas. 581, 582 (C.C.D. Mass. 1814) (No. 10,432) (noting the "intrinsic difficulty"). Justice Story explicated this principle more fully four years later, charging the jury that:

A patent is grantable only for a new and useful invention; and, unless it be distinctly stated, in what that invention specifically consists, it is impossible to say, whether it ought to be patented or not; and it is equally difficult to know, whether the public infringe upon or violate the exclusive right secured by the patent.
Lowell v. Lewis, 15 F. Cas. 1018, 1020 (C.C.D. Mass. 1817) (No. 8568).
In 1828, the Superintendent of the Patent Office instructed applicants that many patents had been vacated for failure to claim what is new and is the invention or discovery:

In the specification it is perfectly proper to describe an entire machine, although most parts of it may have been long known and used, as, otherwise, it may be difficult to make known the improvements; but after doing this, the patentee should distinctly set forth what he claims as new; and this is best done in a separate paragraph, at the end of the specification . . . .
Thomas P. Jones, Information to Persons Applying for Patents, or Transacting Other Business at the Patent Office, 6 Franklin J. \& Am. MEChanics' Mag. 332, 334 (1828).

Thus, by the late 1820 s , it had become common practice for patent applicants to include a formal designation of the claimed invention in a separate paragraph at the end of the specification. The 1836 Patent Act, which reinstituted patent examination, required applicants to "particularly specify and point out the part, improvement, or combination, which he claims as his own invention or discovery." Patent Act of 1836, ch. 357,§6.

The form of patent claiming that emerged during this period-which has come to be known as "central" claiming-differs substantially from the "peripheral" format in common usage today. Central claiming was directed at identifying the thing the patentee built as the invention-a "sign post" indicating that this, and things sufficiently similar to it, were protected by patent. See Dan L. Burk \& Mark A. Lemley, Fence Posts or Sign Posts? Rethinking Patent Claim Construction, 157 U. PA. L. REV. 1743 (2009).

Even before the 1836 Act, some applicants began using a more radical claiming format that would come to be known as "peripheral" claiming. These claims used linguistic formulations, rather than references to specific improvements, to delineate the metes and bounds of the claimed invention. If central claims were sign posts, peripheral claims are "fence posts" that attempt to define the outer bounds of the patent right. Burk \& Lemley, supra. In a series of pamphlets issued in the 1860s, the Patent Office pushed applicants toward the use of peripheral claiming. The Patent Office permitted "genus claiming," and signaled receptivity to multiple claims in stating that "claims in different forms . . . prevent misconstructions." See Ex parte Perry \& Lay, 1869 Dec. Comm'r Pat. 1,1 .

The courts also played a critical role in the shift toward peripheral claiming. In two 1877 Supreme Court decisions-Merrill v. Yeomans, 94 U.S. 568, 573-74 (1876) and Keystone Bridge Co. v. Phoenix Iron Co., 95 U.S. 274, 278 (1877)-the Supreme Court embraced patent law's public notice function by linking the scope of patent protection to the metes and bounds set forth in patent claims. This contributed to the decline of central claiming and eventually made claim construction an essential step in infringement analysis. In a watershed passage in Merrill, the Court explained the critical role of clearly identifiable patent boundaries for technological and economic advance:

The genius of the inventor, constantly making improvements in existing patents -- a process which gives to the patent system its greatest value, -- should not be restrained by vague and indefinite descriptions of claims in existing patents from the salutary and necessary right of improving on that which has already been invented. It seems to us that nothing can be more just and fair, both to the patentee and to the public, than that the former should understand, and correctly describe, just what he has invented, and for what he claims a patent.
The patent claim thereafter quickly emerged as the defining feature of the patent. See Burns v. Meyer, 100 U.S. 671, 672 (1879) ("The courts, therefore, should be careful not to enlarge, by construction, the claim which the Patent Office has admitted, and which the patentee has acquiesced in, beyond the fair interpretation of its terms."). In his seminal 1890 treatise, William C. Robinson characterized it as "the office of the Claim to define the limits of that exclusive use which is secured to the inventor by the patent"; "[t]he Claim is thus the life of the patent so far as the rights of the inventor are concerned." 2 WILLIAM C. ROBINSON, THE LAW OF PATENTS FOR USEFUL INVENTIONS §§504,505 (1890). This shift brought claim construction to a prominent role in patent litigation. As Robinson explained, "The paramount importance of the Claim, and the necessity for such exactness and completeness in its statements as will precisely define the invention to be protected by the patent, have led to the establishment of numerous rules for framing it." Id. at §507.

# ii. Claim Formats 

The challenge in drafting patent claims is to make them as broad as the prior art and other patent doctrines will allow. Because of this, and because drafting claims is timeconsuming and expensive, patent drafters are always on the lookout for convenient ways to broadly cover the elements of inventions. Section 112(b)-(f) guide the drafting of patent claims:
(b) CONCLUSION.-The specification shall conclude with one or more claims particularly pointing out and distinctly claiming the subject matter which the inventor or a joint inventor regards as the invention.
(c) FORM.-A claim may be written in independent or, if the nature of the case admits, in dependent or multiple dependent form.
(d) REFERENCE IN DEPENDENT FORMS.-Subject to subsection (c), a claim in dependent form shall contain a reference to a claim previously set forth and then specify a further limitation of the subject matter claimed. A claim in dependent form shall be construed to incorporate by reference all the limitations of the claim to which it refers.
(e) REFERENCE IN MULTIPLE DEPENDENT FORM.-A claim in multiple dependent form shall contain a reference, in the alternative only, to more than one claim previously set forth and then specify a further limitation of the subject matter claimed. A multiple dependent claim shall not serve as a basis for any other multiple dependent claim. A multiple dependent claim shall be construed to incorporate by reference all the limitations of the particular claim in relation to which it is being considered.
(f) ELEMENT IN CLAIM FOR A COMBINATION.-An element in a claim for a combination may be expressed as a means or step for performing a specified function without the recital of structure, material, or acts in support thereof, and such claim shall be construed to cover the corresponding structure, material, or acts described in the specification and equivalents thereof.
These provisions establish formatting rules to avoid confusion and promote clarity. We will be focusing on §§112(~b) and ( f ) in subsections 4 and 3 respectively. Before doing so, it will be useful to review the basic principles of patent claim construction.