
The new millennium saw three significant shocks to the American economy and, particularly, to the nation's faith in corporate executives and in the wisdom of investing in corporate stock. The first shock, in 2001, commonly identified with the collapse of Enron, involved fraudulent accounting by numerous corporations for the purpose of artificially inflating the value of corporate stock. The second, commencing in 2008, involved the collapse of major financial and industrial institutions that had undertaken excessive risk. The third was the stock market drop and economic shutdown precipitated by the global COVID-19 pandemic that began in March 2020. These events reinvigorated debate about the nature of firms and the role of government regulation. While insights from the contractarian view of the corporation and the principal-agent theorists have not been discarded, these views are now placed in a broader context. As you journey through this book, you will have many occasions to evaluate the various theories of the firm, and assess their strengths and weaknesses. Clearly, however, there is renewed interest in exploring two topics-governance and government regulation - and clearly there is more awareness of the fundamental insights of Berle and Means.

The renewed emphasis on governance builds on Berle and Means's insight that the modern corporation does not have a traditional entrepreneur/owner. Rather, the corporation has managers who in most cases own a very small percentage of the corporation's stock. The renewed emphasis on governance takes seriously the power of the modern corporation highlighted by Berle and Means, and both the potential for good and the threat to society that this power poses. In addition to concern for wealth maximization and protection of shareholders, the current debate includes the influence of the modern corporation on broader issues-human health and happiness, climate change, global poverty, and women's roles in male-dominated societies.

The current focus on governance addresses central questions, whose answers are of interest not only to shareholders but also to other corporate constituents, and to society as a whole. How is the modern corporation governed? How should it be governed? How will decisions be made concerning the allocation of resources within the firm? Who will decide whether to locate a new plant in America or Uganda? Who will decide whether to dedicate 1 percent of the firm's gross revenue to charitable contributions, improve health and safety standards, or increase dividends to shareholders? Who will decide the short- and long-term goals of the firm? What structures, systems, and processes will yield the optimum operation of the firm for the benefit of owners, managers, employees, and society as a whole?

The new millennium also has seen an increased emphasis on government regulation of the modern corporation, both in the United States and abroad. More so than in prior periods, the federal government has exercised its legislative and regulatory authority to shape how American corporations are governed. These changes include requirements that corporate boards of directors be more independent, federal bailout of troubled financial and industrial firms, limits on the amount and structure of executive pay, creation of costly new accounting regimes, increased financial disclosure requirements, and expansion of shareholders' rights to initiate changes in corporate governance structures. Not since the New Deal have we seen government so active in the regulation of the modern corporation.
