
## UPA (1997) ยง 409(c)

Under the Restatement (Third) of Agency, an agent owes their principal duties of care, competence, and diligence. Section 8.08 specifically provides:

Subject to any agreement with the principal, an agent has a duty to the principal to act with the care, competence, and diligence normally exercised by agents in similar circumstances. Special skills or knowledge possessed by an agent are circumstances to be taken into account in determining whether the agent acted with due care and diligence. If an agent claims to possess special skills or knowledge, the agent has a duty to the principal to act with the care, competence, and diligence normally exercised by agents with such skills or knowledge.

Thus, in any business association an agent, including a managerial agent, owes a fiduciary duty of care to her principal.
Since each partner is an agent of the partnership for the purpose of carrying out its business, it might seem appropriate that a general partner's negligent performance of services would likewise give other general partners a cause of action for damages. However, the statutory and limited case law on this point is contradictory.

Older partnership statutes and the UPA (1914) are silent concerning a duty of care. Statutes following UPA (1997) ยง 409 (c) impose a duty of care on general partners. Limited partnership statutes are also silent, but most provide that general partners have the same powers and are subject to the same restrictions and duties as partners in a general partnership.

Though case law is scant, the better view in the limited partnership setting is that general partners owe the limited partnership a fiduciary duty of loyalty and care in the exercise of management functions. The imposition of a duty of care arguably is necessary to protect limited partners, who have no right to manage and control the partnership business and, thus, have little ability to monitor general partners' conduct. However, cases holding managers in any setting liable for breach of a duty of care are very rare. As a result, we learn what the duty of care is mainly by reference to cases finding that there has been no breach of duty. Cincinnati Bell Cellular Systems Co. v. Ameritech Mobile Phone Service of Cincinnati, Inc., 1996 WL 506906 (Del. Ch. Sept. 3, 1996), is a typical case. Cincinnati Bell, a 40 percent owner in a limited partnership, sued Ameritech and its subsidiary AMCI (collectively the general partner), for breach of duty of care in managing the firm's business.

Cincinnati Bell characterizes AMCI's conduct over the years as gross negligence and gross mismanagement. Under Delaware law, therefore, it is Cincinnati Bell's burden to plead and to prove that AMCI was "recklessly uninformed" or acted "outside the bounds of reason." Tomczak v. Morton Thiokol, Inc., Del. Ch., C.A. No. 7861, Hartnett, V.C. (April 5, 1990), Mem. Op. at 31-32; Rabkin v. Philip A. Hunt Chemical Corp., Del. Ch., 547 A.2d 963, 970 (1986). . . .

Most of the disputed evidence . . . centers around conflicting opinions by experts concerning the wisdom of a particular business strategy undertaken by AMCI on behalf of the Partnership (for example, the D2000 initiative; the switch from analog to digital equipment; the absence of a Kotler-type marketing plan; the failure to partner with other wireless carriers in a national consortium; the structure for awarding incentive bonuses). Ameritech counters each charge of mismanagement with an arsenal of statistics and expert opinion justifying the business decisions undertaken on behalf of the Partnership. None of this disputed evidence, however, is a basis for denying summary judgment because the material facts are in agreement - all of the questioned acts or decisions were business decisions undertaken in good faith by the managing partner to meet a strong competitor in the Ohio market (CCI), often on the advice of consultants and experts hired by the managing partner specifically for the purpose of making such decisions. Thus, in the D2000 initiative example, the uncontested facts reveal that Ameritech adopted it on the recommendation of qualified outside consultants and implemented the plan to the consultants' satisfaction. So even though Cincinnati Bell now points to opinions post hoc from its experts that the initiative was poorly conceived or implemented, it cannot show that Ameritech's conduct represents gross negligence. The evidence is and would be that Ameritech adopted D2000 after soliciting advice from recognized experts. As a matter of law, on those undisputed facts, I cannot conclude that Ameritech acted in a recklessly uninformed manner.

1996 WL 506906, at *14-18.
The better answer in the general partnership setting is less clear, as the following case illustrates. On the one hand, general partners may participate actively in management and may be as responsible as other general partners for loss from lack of care. On the other hand, general partners can be passive investors who depend on other general partners' management expertise.

# Ferguson v. Williams <br> Court of Appeals of Texas, 1984 670 S.W.2d 327 

Brady, Justice.
Appellee Williams brought suit to recover funds invested and expended by him in a joint venture with appellants Ferguson and Welborn. In a bench trial, the trial court rendered judgment for Williams against appellants jointly and severally in the sum of $30,518.53 damages, plus $5,000.00 exemplary damages and attorney fees of $20,719.00. The trial court filed findings of fact and conclusions of law holding that Williams' interest in the venture was an "investment contract" and thus a security; that the same was not registered with the State Securities Board; that the same was sold by Ferguson and Welborn by means of false representations; that appellants were also negligent in the management of the venture; and that appellee Williams was entitled to rescind and recover all funds invested or expended by him in the venture. . . .

On March 1, 1979, Ferguson and Welborn, doing business as the F \& W Development Company, purchased two apartment buildings containing thirty-two two-bedroom units located near Bergstrom Air Force Base from the U.S. Corps of Engineers. The buildings were to be removed to a new location, rehabilitated, leased to tenants, and then sold at a profit by the partners. Two months later, the appellants, running low on cash, contacted appellee Williams and sold him a one-fourth interest in the venture for $15,000.00. With the infusion of this additional capital, the appellants purchased land near Bergstrom, depositing $5,000.00 as earnest money. Appellants used the balance of Williams' money to secure a $300,000.00 permanent mortgage loan commitment. However, because of their inability to obtain interim or construction financing, the venture failed and the buildings eventually were dismantled and materials sold to pay debts. . . .

In our view, Williams played a significant role in the actual business of the partnership. Appellee volunteered his employees to help get the buildings ready to move, sending an overseer for the job. Appellee volunteered the use of his front-end loader to clean up the building site, kept in touch with the progress of the work, and, according to the evidence, talked to Ferguson at least once or twice a week from May, 1979 until January, 1980. When the partnership bank account needed money, Williams advanced an additional $5,000.00 to help get this project "rolling." Williams aided the business in obtaining an $11,000.00 loan from the Bank of Austin. He also signed a loan application with Ryan Mortgage Company for a permanent loan commitment for the partnership. He participated in preparation of a brochure, paid bills of the firm, and inspected the site chosen to relocate the buildings. We agree with appellants' argument that Williams' conduct was that of a partner and "not that of a passive investor." ...
As to the findings by the trial court that appellants Ferguson and Welborn were guilty of negligence in the management of the affairs of the business and that such negligence was the proximate cause of Williams' loss of his invested funds, we hold as a matter of law that negligence in the management of the affairs of a general partnership or joint venture does not create any right of action against that partner by other members of the partnership. It is only when there is a breach of trust, such as when one partner or joint venturer holds property or assets belonging to the partnership or venture, and converts such to his own use, would such action lie. In the ordinary management and operation of a general partnership or joint venture there is no liability to the other partners or joint venturers for the negligence in the management or operation of the affairs of the enterprise, such as the six acts of "negligence" found by the trial court. The six findings of "negligence" by the trial court were that appellants were negligent: (1) "in the manner in which they sought construction and permanent financing for the venture"; (2) "in failing to promptly retain a house moving firm to move the condemned buildings"; (3) "in failing to adequately capitalize the venture"; (4) "in failing to promptly secure the necessary real property for the project"; (5) "in failing to diligently pursue completion of the venture's responsibility under its contract with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers"; and (6) "in failing to truthfully and fully disclose to Williams all details of the venture." Appellee cites us no authority, and we have found none, to support his theory of this case. None of the "negligence" findings involve any breach of trust or fiduciary duty of Ferguson and Welborn to Williams. . . .

# NOTES AND QUESTIONS 

1. Why is case law virtually silent on the question of a partner's duty of care in a general partnership setting? Is there something about the archetypal general partnership that makes such a duty inappropriate? Is it more efficient to have partners collectively bear the risk of loss from choosing to associate with a partner who proves to be negligent or unskilled, than to have negligence deterred by judicial enforcement of a fiduciary duty of care? If partners should owe a duty of care, why would a gross negligence standard be appropriate instead of a more stringent standard such as an obligation to use either reasonable care or the care that would be used by an ordinarily prudent person in like circumstance?
2. Ferguson v. Williams has been followed in both the joint venture and limited partnership setting. See Duffy v. Piazza Constr., Inc., 815 P.2d 267 (Wash. Ct. App. 1991) (joint venturer does not owe other venturers a duty of care), and Johnson v. Weber, 803 P.2d 939 (Ariz. Ct. App. 1990) (general partner does not owe limited partner duty of care).
3. For the proposition that general partners do owe limited partners a fiduciary duty of care, see Roper v. Thomas, 298 S.E.2d 424 (N.C. Ct. App. 1982); Wyler v. Feurer, 85 Cal. App. 3d 392, 149 Cal. Rptr. 626 (1978); Boxer v. Husky Oil Co., 1983 WL 17937 (Del. Ch. June 28, 1983); and Shinn v. Thrust IV, Inc., 786 P.2d 285 (Wash. Ct. App. 1990).
# PROBLEM 2-6 

In January, Sharon and Ruth formed a limited liability partnership, BHD, Ltd., to purchase and renovate dilapidated residences in the Barrow Historic District. As per the agreement, Sharon was in charge of supervising renovation and marketing. Ruth was only responsible for providing needed capital. BHD acquired two Victorian houses in February. Ruth then left town to spend six months on active duty with the Marine Corps. While Sharon had many years of experience as a builder, she had never worked on renovation of older structures. She chose workers and materials that were totally unsuited for the project. Upon completion, Sharon spent lavishly for radio and television ads trumpeting the two projects. BHD was unable to sell the two houses for more than the original purchase price, resulting in a loss of all of the capital invested in renovation and advertising.

Ruth has asked your advice concerning BHD's losses. Do you recommend that she sue Sharon for breach of her fiduciary duty of care?
