
## Mallet and Company Inc. v. Lacayo <br> United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit 16 F.4th 364 (3d Cir. 2021)

JORDAN, CIRCUIT JUDGE.
Behind the breads, cakes, and other treats on our grocery store shelves, there is a ferociously competitive market for baking supplies, and that is the setting for this trade secret and unfair competition case.

In 2019, Mallet and Company Inc. ("Mallet") learned that Russell T. Bundy Associates, Inc., doing business as Bundy Baking Solutions ("Bundy"), was becoming its newest competitor in the sale of baking release agents. Release agents are lubricants that allow baked goods to readily separate from the containers in which they are made. Bundy was already well-known for other products it offered to the commercial baking industry when it decided to launch a new subsidiary, Synova LLC ("Synova"), to sell baking release agents. Synova hired two of Mallet's employees, both of whom had substantial access to Mallet's proprietary information. Taking some of that information with them from Mallet to Synova, they helped Synova rapidly develop, market, and sell release ag ents to Mallet's customers. Mallet sued, saying such progress would have taken years to accomplish but for the misappropriation of its trade secrets. Agreeing with Mallet, the District Court issued the preliminary injunction now challenged on appeal, restraining Bundy, Synova, and those employees (collectively, "the Defendants") from competing with Mallet.

While we appreciate the challenges inherent in disputes involving trade secrets and requests for preliminary relief, the injunction at issue is flawed and must be vacated. For the reasons that follow, we will remand for further consideration of what, if any, equitable relief is warranted . . .

## I. BACKGROUND

## A. Factual Background

## 1. Mallet and the Defendant Employees

For over eighty years, Mallet has been in the business of developing, manufacturing, and selling baking release agents as well as the equipment used to apply such agents. Release agents are applied to commercial baking pans to ensure the consistent release of baked goods over hundreds of uses. They thus play a crucial role in large-scale baking operations. While the ingredients used to create them-mineral oils, vegetable oils, and lecithin-are commonly known, developing a successful release agent is not as simple as knowing a few of its components. There are "a wide range of factors that have to be considered when formulating a release agent," including product performance, stability, application, cost, availability, and packaging. And the efficacy of a release agent can greatly depend on the customer's product, pan condition, storage conditions, and machinery used to apply the agent. As a result, there are different kinds of release agents, each with unique properties that may be further tailored to maximize performance when used in the production of certain goods. Still, competitors in the release agent market often manufacture and sell identical or similar products.
. . . Prior to 2018, [Mallet] manufactured about fifty different release agents, including its "Vegalube Super P" ("Super P"), which it calls "the premier and bestperforming baking release agent product in the market." Mallet contends that it has "take[n] substantial time, research, and effort" to formulate and perfect its release agents, including Super P. After developing a product in the laboratory, additional work is needed to bring that product to scale and optimize its performance at a customer's facility. . . . To safeguard that competitive advantage, Mallet has put in place several measures to protect its information, including nondisclosure and noncompetition agreements with its employees, restricted access to its lab and formulas, and password protection for its computer network.

Along with its release agent "formulas and [the] processes used to make them[,]" Mallet considers the following information to be its "confidential, proprietary, trade secret information":
specific products sold to customers or purchased from suppliers; all information pertaining to Mallet's business with its customers and its suppliers; Mallet's sales data and cost data; the body of knowledge about the development, production, and application of Mallet's release agents and equipment, including the tailoring of release agents and equipment for specific customer challenges; information about the internal business affairs of any customers, suppliers, distributors, agents and contractors doing business with Mallet; pricing information; strategies; marketing information; and exclusive relationships with certain suppliers of release agent ingredients.

Mallet's Proposed Findings of Fact. According to Mallet, "the trade secret in question here is the overall body of knowledge that connects . . . the development, production, application and implementation of the release agent . . . coupled with Mallet's proprietary equipment, which go hand in hand with [a] formulated solution."

As sweeping as that statement is, Mallet does recognize some limits on what it can claim as a trade secret. For example, it does not consider its "product data sheets" to be trade secret information, since those specification sheets are "produced and provided to consumers of its products[.]" It also agrees that some ingredients in baking release agents . . . have been common knowledge in the industry for more than thirty years, and that the components for release agents are published in product data sheets, articles, and company websites, and are therefore public knowledge, though the precise ratios and processes for combining them are not. . . .

Mallet further recognizes that its own patents disclose "various formulas for the creation of the lubricants[,]" ""examples of blends and blend ratios[,]" and a "series of different formulated release agents[.]" Those patents publicize some properties of each formulated release agent "based on various tests that Mallet . . . had conducted," including "viscosity, stability, texture and other releasing characteristics." While seeming to concede that information in patents cannot-at least by itself-constitute trade secrets, Mallet . . . distinguishes the "particular formulation[s]" that its patents cover from the "know-how" that Mallet has developed over its eighty-year presence in the marketplace and that it continues to utilize on an ongoing basis for the "formulation, application[,] and implementation of [its] release agents for customers." According to Mallet, that know-how is a trade secret. And two of its former employees, Ada Lacayo and William Bowers, had substantial access to it.

# a. Lacayo's Employment with Mallet 

[Lacayo worked at Mallet for 20 years] Lacayo's job responsibilities spanned all aspects of Mallet's release agent business, from product development and quality control to customer-specific applications and technical support. Through her director positions, she obtained extensive access to Mallet's technical information. That information allowed her to analyze ingredient interactions, create over two dozen new product formulas and processing methods, and perform "economic justifications and case studies to substantiate improvements." In addition, Lacayo played a key role in quality control, running onsite tests for customers, troubleshooting issues, and recommending changes to improve product performance. Along with educating individual customers, Lacayo promoted Mallet's products, solutions, and machinery more generally. She "wrote and designed manuals, instructional programs, marketing materials, [and] presentations," which she "delivered . . . to diverse audiences in English and Spanish." She also participated in trade shows, "[m]anaged the Latin American machinery and product introduction program," and "[c]onducted seminars on product lines." . . . And as a result of her extensive exposure to all sides of Mallet's business and the "know-how [she] gleaned from Mallet over decades[,]" she was widely known by "the customer base of the baking industry[.]"

## 2. Bundy, Synova, and the Baking Release Agent Industry

. . . Synova was formally "created on April 27, 2017 and launched on May 15, 2019 to manufacture and distribute external baking release agents and oils." Between its creation and its launch, Synova's President, Robert A. Bundy, was "engaged in business development[,] ... looking for as much information on as many topics as [he] could get" on the baking release agent industry. Along the way, he sought information from and recruited Lacayo and Bowers. . . .

Although Lacayo secretly interviewed and accepted a position with Synova on January 22, 2018, she remained employed with Mallet until February 12, 2018. When she did finally announce that she was leaving Mallet, Lacayo concealed her employment with Synova and informed Mallet that she was instead leaving to take care of her mother.

Just three days before her interview with Synova, on January 19, 2018, Lacayo copied 1,748 files onto a USB drive. Those "bulk copied files were stored across four main (root) folders" titled: "Mallet Lab Methods, MRO Project, Supplier Approval Program, and Supplier Information." She also emailed information, including screenshots of two formulas, from Mallet's files to her private Gmail account. On February 28, 2018, when she was no longer employed with Mallet, Lacayo emailed to herself a spreadsheet with technical data from Mallet's research. . . .

During discovery in this case, "over 1,000 documents" containing "metadata associated with Mallet" were found on Lacayo's Synova computer, with 649 of those documents having "a Mallet logo ... [branded] on the face of the document." Digital forensic evidence indicates that Lacayo not only copied those documents but also used them, including a Mallet release agent formula and associated pricing information, while working for Synova.

The purloined documents, however, are not the whole of the problem Mallet has with Lacayo. It says that "the value she brings [to a competitor] goes far beyond any particular formula she may have provided" or any documents she may have stolen. "It's really the know-how that she brings" to Synova that Mallet says it is worried about. After "work[ing] for Mallet for" so long, Lacayo "has quite a lot of know-how that went with her to the Bundy organization[,]" including information about "the formulation, application and implementation of release agent" products that Mallet had "developed over the course of its 80 years." And that know-how, it says, "would be impossible to erase from her mind."

In January 2018, Synova was in the earliest stages of its existence, and while " [t] he development of the release agents had already begun," it had not completed a final product. Synova had "identified the archetypes of ingredients that would be required and broadly [knew] the ratios of those ingredients." But it was still in the research and development process and had not yet conducted "any internal product testing on a release agent." As Mr. Bundy explained, "that was part of the reason to hire someone with a good science background[,]" like Lacayo. Less than ten months after joining Synova, Lacayo had formulated a lineup of release agents, which Synova marketed as direct replacements for Mallet's release agents. Indeed, in internal correspondence it explicitly described its new formulas as "Synova=Mallet." Lacayo provided oil blend recipes to Synova, built Synova's processes and programs, and touted her ability to match a Mallet product for a customer. ...

# B. Procedural Background 

. . . [T]he District Court found that "[a]t least some of the Mallet information in question, possessed by Defendants, satisfies the trade secret definition(s)," including, "among other things, highly sensitive details about how Mallet produces, markets and sells its release agents[.]" The Court listed thirteen categories of Mallet information it deemed "protected materials," as follows:

Mallet's formulas; customer purchase orders demonstrating Mallet's pricing; identification of customers experiencing difficulty with Mallet's products; internal discussions of "actual major problems" at customer locations; internal discussions of how Mallet would address issues with its products; internal discussions of customers' preferences and complaints; Mallet's completed organic certifications; identification of Mallet's supply source for product ingredients; Mallet's internal manuals and procedures showing how Mallet's lab is operated; pricing and volume data; information about Mallet's equipment; Mallet's training materials showing how Mallet markets and sells its products; and a compilation of Mallet's product specification sheets. . . .

# II. DISCUSSION 

We fully appreciate the challenges inherent in expedited proceedings. Nevertheless, when an injunction lacks sufficient specificity to permit meaningful appellate review, there needs to be another effort at crafting the contours of the order. Because the District Court did not identify with specificity the information it found to be Mallet's trade secrets, we are not in a position to make an informed decision as to whether Mallet is likely to prevail on its trade secret misappropriation claims. . . .

We will accordingly vacate the injunction order and remand for reconsideration. In doing so, we outline a few matters to be considered when identifying allegedly misappropriated trade secrets. We also discuss the permissible scope of an injunction and the limits of a district court's discretion when determining the associated amount of a bond.

## A. A preliminary injunction predicated on trade secret misappropriation must adequately identify the allegedly misappropriated trade secrets.

For a federal trade secret misappropriation claim, [plaintiff must show]: "(1) the existence of a trade secret . . . (2) that 'is related to a product or service used in, or intended for use in, interstate or foreign commerce[,]' and (3) the misappropriation of that trade secret[.]" Oakwood Labs. LLC v. Thanoo, 999 F.3d 892, 905 (3d Cir. 2021). And, of course, each of those elements is predicated on an adequate identification of what the plaintiff contends to be its trade secret. See id. ("To plead the existence of a trade secret in a misappropriation claim . . ., [a plaintiff] must sufficiently identify the information it claims as a trade secret[.]").

The Defend Trade Secrets Act ("DTSA") defines a trade secret as information that "the owner thereof has taken reasonable measures to keep . . . secret" and that "derives independent economic value, actual or potential, from not being generally known to, and not being readily ascertainable through proper means by, another person who can obtain economic value from the disclosure or use of the information[.]" 18 U.S.C. §1893(3). We cannot evaluate whether a plaintiff is likely to succeed on any element of a trade secret misappropriation claim until the plaintiff has sufficiently described those trade secrets. See Porous Media Corp. v. Midland Brake Inc., 187 F.R.D. 598, 600 (D. Minn. 1999) ("Failure to identify the trade secrets with sufficient specificity renders the Court powerless to enforce any trade secret claim."). It follows that a district court's injunction order must first adequately identify the information to which it accords trade secret status. Otherwise, the injunction order lacks the foundation necessary for holding a plaintiff likely to prevail on its misappropriation claim. Without that information, the injunction order fails to comply with Rule 65(d), and it must be vacated.

The District Court determined that "[a]t least some of the Mallet information in question" constitutes protectable trade secrets, "includ[ing], among other things, highly sensitive details about how Mallet produces, markets and sells its release agents[.]"
Absent from the District Court's high-level description, however, are any specifics of what those "highly sensitive details" are. Rather, we are left with a list of thirteen broad categories of Mallet information which the District Court deemed "protected materials":

Mallet's formulas; customer purchase orders demonstrating Mallet's pricing; identification of customers experiencing difficulty with Mallet's products; internal discussions of "actual major problems" at customer locations; internal discussions of how Mallet would address issues with its products; internal discussions of customers' preferences and complaints; Mallet's completed organic certifications; identification of Mallet's supply source for product ingredients; Mallet's internal manuals and procedures showing how Mallet's lab is operated; pricing and volume data; information about Mallet's equipment; Mallet's training materials showing how Mallet markets and sells its products; and a compilation of Mallet's product specification sheets.
While some information falling within those categories may very well include trade secrets, there is a fair probability that many of the categories-and perhaps all of themalso include information that does not qualify for trade secret protection.

The injunction order's statement of protected material is better characterized as a list of general categories of business and technical information, a list that could be used to describe documents found in any number of corporations. See A\&P Tech., Inc. v. Lariviere, 2017 WL 6606961, at *10 (S.D. Ohio Dec. 27, 2017) ("Terms such as 'engineering,' 'research and development procedures and materials,' and 'marketing materials' could be applied to almost any corporation in existence, and do not in any way allow Defendants to properly craft a defense around the alleged misappropriation of trade secrets."). The generic list thus falters against the standard for specifying a trade secret. At a minimum, "the subject matter of the trade secret must be described 'with sufficient particularity to separate it from matters of general knowledge in the trade or of special knowledge of those persons who are skilled in the trade, and to permit the defendant to ascertain at least the boundaries within which the secret lies.'" Oakwood, 999 F.3d at 906) (quoting Diodes, Inc. v. Franzen, 260 Cal.App.2d 244, 67 Cal.Rptr. 19, 24 (1968) (describing the minimum specificity threshold to survive a motion to dismiss). That is especially the case where, as here, the record suggests that those boundaries may not be particularly clear. ^[23]

For example, Mallet recognizes that its own patents publicly disclose some of its formulas, but it appears to contend that even formulas thus publicly disclosed are part of its trade secrets. (See Mallet Depo.) ("What I am saying is while these formulations were developed here, it doesn't necessarily mean that the exact formula in one of these [patent] tables is at question as a trade secret. These are examples only. They form a part of the examples of the patent. . . . They are part of a trade secret.") (emphasis added).) If that is really its position-and it is hard for us to tell-then it is hard to take entirely seriously. A formula disclosed in a patent is, by definition, not a secret. Nevertheless, "[w]hile the precise information provided within or directly ascertainable from a patent cannot constitute a trade secret, patent holders are not necessarily precluded from cultivating trade secrets that go beyond the corpus of the patent or that refine the patent's process in some proprietary way." AutoTrakk, LLC v. Auto. Leasing Specialists, Inc., 2017 WL 2936730, at *5 (M.D. Pa. July 10, 2017). Problematically, though, Mallet fails to explain how we or anyone else is to distinguish between what is generally known or available information and what it contends to be protectable trade secrets. With a wave of the hand, it declares everything to be secret know-how. (See Mallet Depo. ("The issue at hand is not so much that the formula might be the same or different. What is at hand is that the know-how that Ms. Lacayo took from Mallet, and is applying within Bundy, is all about delivering the performance, the quality, and those other factors I mentioned to the customer to provide them the solution. That know-how was developed by Mallet over 80 years.").)

When the breadth of a trade secret description is so far-reaching that it includes publicly available information (like patent disclosures) and admitted industry knowledge, that information is not specific enough to be accorded trade secret status. DeRubeis v. Witten Techs., Inc., 244 F.R.D. 676, 689 (N.D. Ga. 2007) ("If the list is too general, it will encompass material that the defendant will be able to show cannot be trade secret." While we recognize the difficulty inherent in articulating what trade secrets Lacayo and Bowers may have misappropriated-and it certainly appears they took things that may qualify as trade secrets-"care must [still] be taken to not allow a plaintiff in a trade secret misappropriation case to make generalized claims that leave a defendant wondering what the secrets at issue might be[.]" Oakwood, 999 F.3d at 907.

The District Court, in effect, recapitulated Mallet's own broadly stated categories of information. . . . But, like Mallet, it did not identify which formulas it referred to, nor did it describe any characteristics or properties contributing specific competitive value to Mallet that could serve as a marker for separating Mallet's formulas from publicly available information or generally known formulas in the industry. The District Court also concluded that "pricing and volume data" and "Mallet's training materials showing how [it] markets and sells its products" are trade secrets. But those trade secret descriptions fare no better than Mallet's assertion that "pricing information[,]
strategies[, and] marketing information" are trade secrets. Specific examples are needed and, if provided, could very well suffice to support injunctive relief. ^[25]
. . [I]t is first and foremost the plaintiff's burden to specifically identify what it contends to be its trade secrets and to demonstrate with record evidence a "significantly better than negligible" chance, of establishing the existence of those trade secrets. If a plaintiff fails to meet that burden, the district court faces the same problem we now have on appeal, and a preliminary injunction for trade secret misappropriation ought not issue.

While we are persuaded that some of Mallet's information-such as that contained in its patents-cannot legitimately have the protected status that it may have been afforded by the District Court, we lack the information necessary to decide anything more about what allegedly does have that protected status and Mallet's likelihood of success in establishing misappropriation of that specific information. So, instead, we share two observations for consideration on remand.

First, information will not necessarily be deprived of protection as a trade secret because parts of it are publicly available. A confidential compilation and organization of public information can amount to a trade secret. "Courts have long recognized that 'a trade secret can exist in a combination of characteristics and components, each of which, by itself, is in the public domain, but the unified process, design and operation of which, in unique combination, affords a competitive advantage and is a protectable secret.'" AirFacts, Inc. v. de Amezaga, 909 F.3d 84, 96 (4th Cir. 2018) (quoting Imperial Chem. Indus. v. Nat'l Distillers \& Chem. Corp., 342 F.2d 737, 742 (2d Cir. 1965)). Similarly, "[w]hile the precise information provided within or directly ascertainable from a patent [or other published document] cannot constitute a trade secret," that does not, as noted earlier, mean that a patentee is "precluded from cultivating trade secrets that go beyond the corpus of the patent or that refine the patent's process in some proprietary way." AutoTrakk, LLC, 2017 WL 2936730, at *5.


Second, the Court found that "Mallet's evidence establishes that the formulation of its relevant products takes substantial time, sometime years" and that "Lacayo's testimony, to the effect that formulating such products is 'very easy,' was not credible." But those findings make no mention of other evidence that supported Lacayo's claim about the ease of developing some formulas. Two other witnesses-including Mallet's own witness, Roja Ergun-acknowledged that some basic release agents were in fact easy to make. . . . Further insight into the District Court's weighing of such conflicting evidence will assist us in providing meaningful appellate review.
Second, an employee's general know-how should be distinguished from the particular secrets held by an employer. In other words, while an employee's general knowhow does not constitute trade secret information, employers remain free to identify and protect their particular proprietary information. Admittedly, the line distinguishing between the two-an employee's general knowledge or skill and an employer's protectable trade secrets-may often be difficult to draw. Thus, in exercising its equitable discretion, a district court need not draw the line with precision, but the plaintiff has to provide something better than sweeping generalities for the court to work with. It is the trade secret owner that bears the burden of demonstrating its claimed secrets are protectable and are not general industry knowledge. Just how much specificity a court should require of the plaintiff-owner is again a context-specific matter. We cannot provide a bright-line rule. The best we can do is say that Mallet's very general description of categories does not "sufficiently identify the information it claims as a trade secret," Oakwood, 999 F.3d at 905, and thus does not suffice to justify the sweeping injunction the District Court issued. . . .

# COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS 

1. The Often Fuzzy Line between General Skill and Trade Secrets. Trade secret law aims to protect valuable information while at the same time not interfering with labor mobility and robust competition. Unlike patents, trade secrets are not reduced to claims filed with a public authority. Furthermore, plaintiffs generally do not provide detailed identification of trade secrets in the complaint so as to avoid disclosure. They typically toe the FED. R. CIV. P. 8(a) notice-pleading standard, subject to the dictates of Bell Atl. Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544 (2007), and Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662 (2009). How might Mallet have better identified its trade secrets to sustain the preliminary injunction? What risks would it have faced by providing greater specificity? Was the plaintiff's problem in Mallet just a failure to specify the secrets? Or is the claim that all its formulas and business know-how are trade secrets a sign that it can't identify secrets that meet the standards of the DTSA?
2. Identification of Trade Secrets. The lack of clearly defined trade secret boundaries in advance of a misappropriation action "raises the possibility that the trade secret owner will tailor the scope of the trade secret in litigation to conform to the litigation strategy." TLS Mgmt \& Mktng Serv. v. Rodriguez-Toledo, 966 F.3d 46, 52 (1st Cir. 2020). To address the notice problem of amorphous, overbroad, and shifting trade secret misappropriation allegations, some states require trade secret plaintiffs to identify the secrets in question with specificity as part of the early case management. See, e.g., CAL. CODE Civ. Pro. §2019.210 (requiring "the party alleging the misappropriation [to] identify the trade secret with reasonable particularity"); SL Montevideo Tech., Inc. v. Eaton Aerospace, LLC, 491 F.3d 350, 354 (8th Cir. 2007) (observing that "[s]imply to assert that a trade secret resides in some combination of otherwise known data is not sufficient, as the combination itself must be delineated with some particularity in establishing its trade secret status"). As the DTSA has taken hold, federal courts have increasingly pushed plaintiffs to identify the trade secrets at issue through an early pretrial disclosure process. See Quintara Biosciences v. Ruifeng Biztech, 2021 WL 2166880 (N.D. Cal. May 27, 2021) (requiring the trade secret claimants in a DTSA case to submit a statement identifying the particular trade secrets at issue; see generally Peter S. Menell, et. al., Trade Secret Case Management Judicial Guide ch. 4 (2023). This distinctive augmentation of civil procedure is often intertwined with the scheduling of discovery. Courts have cautioned, however, that "identifying a trade secret is not intended to be a mini-trial on the merits but is instead a preliminary step before reaching the merits." Brescia v. Angelin, 172 Cal.App.4th 135, 144 (Cal. Ct. App. 2009).
3. Secrecy. While information must not be generally known or readily ascertainable in order to be a secret, the plaintiff can still disclose the secret for business purposes. As one court put it:

Although the law requires secrecy, it need not be absolute. Public revelation would, of course, dispel all secrecy, but the holder of a secret need not remain totally silent:

He may, without losing his protection, communicate to employees involved in its use. He may likewise communicate it to others pledged to secrecy. . . . Nevertheless, a substantial element of secrecy must exist, so that except by the use of improper means, there would be difficulty in acquiring the information.
Restatement of Torts, §757 Comment b (1939). We conclude that a holder may divulge his information to a limited extent without destroying its status as a trade secret. To hold otherwise would greatly limit the holder's ability to profit from his secret. If disclosure to others is made to further the holder's economic interests, it should, in appropriate circumstances, be considered a limited disclosure that does not destroy the requisite secrecy. The only question is whether we are dealing with a limited disclosure here. . . .

Looking . . . to the policy considerations involved, we glean two reasons why Metallurgical's disclosures to others are limited and therefore insufficient to extinguish the secrecy Metallurgical's other evidence has suggested. First, the disclosures were not public announcements [such as disclosures in an issued patent]; rather, Metallurgical divulged its information to only two businesses with whom it was dealing. . . . Second, the disclosures were made to further Metallurgical's economic interests. Disclosure to Consarc was made with the hope that Consarc could build the second furnace. A long-standing agreement gave La Floridienne the right, as a licensee, to the information in exchange for royaltypayments. Metallurgical therefore revealed its discoveries as part of business transactions by which it expected to profit.
Metallurgical Indus. v Fourtek, 790 F.2d 1195, 1200 (5th Cir. 1986). Should the fact that neither Consarc or Floridienne signed NDAs doom Metallurgical's trade secret misappropriation lawsuit against Fourtek, a consultant who had signed an NDA? What if Metallurgical had sold the furnace technology to the general public? Cf. Turret Labs v. CargoSprint, LLC, 2022 WL 701161 (2d Cir. Mar. 9, 2022) (holding that the failure to obtain a confidentiality agreement from business partners showed that the plaintiff did not take reasonable efforts to protect its secrets).
4. Compilations of Unprotectable Information. The categories of information eligible for protection as trade secrets are expansive. As Mallet makes clear, they include secret combinations of items which by themselves can be publicly known. They also include both scientific and technical information and business information, such as customer lists and business plans. As we will see throughout our study of IP law, the protection of compilations of elements that are themselves unprotectable is a major theme.

Courts have frequently held certain basic ideas or concepts incapable of protection as secrets because they were too well known to derive value from secrecy. See Buffets, Inc. v. Klinke, 73 F.3d 765 (9th Cir. 1996) (holding that the plaintiff could not claim its relatively straightforward recipes for barbecued chicken and macaroni and cheese as trade secrets); Bimbo Bakeries USA v. Sycamore, 39 F.4th 1250, 1259-64 (3d Cir. 2022) (finding bread recipe unprotectable because the individual elements were sufficiently obvious); but cf. Camp Creek Hospitality Inns v. Sheraton Franchise Corp., 139 F.3d 1396 (11th Cir. 1997) (holding that a hotel could protect information about its prices, discounts, and occupancy levels as a trade secret where it was closely guarded information in the industry); Nextdoor.com, Inc. v. Abhyanker, 2013 WL 3802526 (N.D. Cal. July 19, 2013) (finding that the decision to test a new neighborhood-oriented social network in a particular neighborhood could be a trade secret where the plaintiff did substantial investigation to select the most appropriate neighborhood to launch the network).
5. Novelty. Courts have made it clear that trade secrets need not be entirely new to receive trade secret protection. The idea may have occurred to someone before; it may even be in use by another. But if it is not generally known or readily ascertainable to the competitors in an industry, it may still qualify for trade secret protection. One widely cited decision described the standard for protectable ideas as follows:
[U]niqueness in the patent law sense is not an essential element of a trade secret, for the patent laws are designed to encourage invention, whereas trade secret law is designed to protect against a breach of faith. However, the trade secret must "possess at least that modicum of originality which will separate it from everyday knowledge." Cataphote Corporation v. Hudson, 444 F.2d 1313, 1315 (5th Cir. 1971). As stated in an authoritative treatise on this subject:

As distinguished from a patent, a trade secret need not be essentially new, novel or unique; therefore, prior art is a less effective defense in a trade secret case than it is in a patent infringement case. The idea need not be complicated; it may be intrinsically simple and nevertheless qualify as a secret, unless it is in common knowledge and, therefore, within the public domain.
2 Callman, Unfair Competition, Trademarks and Monopolies §52.1 (3d ed. 1968).
Forest Laboratories v. The Pillsbury Co., 425 F.2d 621, 624 (7th Cir. 1971). Some courts have gone even further, suggesting that "[a] trade secret may be no more than 'merely a mechanical improvement that a good mechanic can make."' SI Handling Systems, Inc. v. Heisley, 753 F.2d 1244, 1256 (3d Cir. 1985). And information may not be generally known or even readily ascertainable to people in one industry even if it is wellknown in a completely different field. See Masimo v. True Wearables, 2022 WL 205485 (Fed. Cir. Jan. 24, 2022). By contrast, "[i]nformation in published patents or patent applications is readily ascertainable by proper means." Olaplex Inc. v. L'Oreal USA, 855 F. Appx. 701 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Why not require novelty in order to protect a trade secret? That is, why should the law protect the "secrecy" of a piece of information if others have already discovered it?
6. Why should we bother to protect secrets that were stumbled upon with little or no investment in research but that happen to have "value"? Does the economic rationale for intellectual property suggest that such secrets will be underproduced absent protection?
7. Why is secrecy required at all? Trade secrets are not misappropriated unless information is taken by improper means or from a confidential relationship. Why aren't those tortious elements enough? It is certainly possible to envision a "misappropriation" tort that punishes diversion of information, whether or not it is secret. Indeed, some cases discussed in Chapter VI(B) and VI(C) have created just such a common law tort.

One possible objection to such a scheme is that it would chill the legitimate acquisition of information from competitors. But the only information protected by a misappropriation tort that is not also protected by trade secret law is public information. Since it is publicly available, the need for competitors to acquire it directly from another company or through dubious means is presumably low. ^4

But there may be a gray area between "secret" information and "public" information. If three large companies all use the same process but guard it closely, is it a secret? If a company guards a process closely as a secret, but an account of the process is available in an obscure published source, does the company have a protectable trade secret?
8. Known vs. Knowable. Does it matter how obscure the published source is if the defendant in fact obtains the information from the plaintiff rather than going to the publicly available source? What theory of trade secrets would support a finding of liability in such a case?

Many courts following the Restatement of Torts took the position that if the defendant in fact obtained the information from the plaintiff, then it must be a trade secret. Thus, in Rohm \& Haas Co. v. Adco Chemical Co., 689 F.2d 424 (3d Cir. 1982), defendant Harvey was a former Rohm \& Haas employee who was hired by Adco to duplicate a process for producing "paint delivery vehicles," the chemicals added to paint that allow it to be applied to surfaces easily. There seems no question in the case that Harvey did, in fact, memorize the plaintiff's formula and take it to Adco. In their defense, the defendants offered evidence that a series of prior publications had, in fact, disclosed Rohm \& Haas's process. The court nonetheless concluded that it was a protectable trade secret, in part because the defendants did not in fact obtain the information from those publications.

This view gives broad scope to trade secret protection, because it allows a plaintiff to protect information that could have been acquired properly but in fact was not. It also underscores the unfair competition rationale for trade secret protection-the problem is not that the defendant acquired the information, but the way in which the defendant acquired it.

In a significant break with the RESTATEMENT OF TORTS rule, the UTSA provides that information is not a trade secret if it is "generally known" or "readily ascertainable by proper means." (California, by contrast, treats ready ascertainability as a defense, not part of the plaintiff's case. See CAL. Civ. CODE § 3426.1(d)(1); ABBA Rubber Co. v. Seaquist, 286 Cal.Rptr. 518 (Ct. App. 1991). Under this view, once a secret is readily available through public sources, it loses all trade secret protection. At this point, the defendant is free to obtain the information from the public source or from the plaintiff herself. See RESTATEMENT (THIRD) OF UNFAIR COMPETITION §39, Comment f, at 433 ("When the information is readily ascertainable from such [public] sources, however, actual resort to the public domain is a formality that should not determine liability.").

Even jurisdictions that follow the RESTATEMENT OF TORTS view place limit what can qualify for trade secret protection. If information is generally known to the public, or even within a specialized industry, it does not qualify for protection. No company can claim that " E=mc^2 " is a trade secret, for example, even if it keeps the formula under lock and key, and even if the defendant steals it from the company rather than obtaining it elsewhere. See, e.g., Spring Indus. v. Nicolozakes, 58 U.S.P.Q.2d 1794 (Ohio Ct. App. 2000) (information on gravel mining not a trade secret despite efforts to keep it confidential). We consider the rather different issue of whether two parties could agree to treat the formula as a secret in Section D.
9. Mallet offered strong evidence that the defendants surreptitiously absconded with much of the knowledge that Mallet developed over decades of building its business, yet its failure to specifically identify the trade secrets barred effective relief. Is that result unfair? Are some trade secrets too broad and amorphous to garner effective protection? Does the court's concern for free competition justify its complete overturning of the preliminary injunction? Would Mallet have been better served by seeking an early trial on the merits rather than pursuing preliminary relief?
# PROBLEMS 

Problem II-1. Company X possesses a valuable piece of information about the process for making its product. That information is not known at all outside company X. Suppose X discloses the information to two companies, A and B. A receives the information in confidence, and subject to a written agreement that it will not use or disclose the information outside the bounds of the relationship. B receives the information without any restrictions whatever on its use. Does X have a protectable trade secret that it can assert against A? Against B? Against C, who steals the information from X's computer network?

Does your answer change if X,A,B, and C are the only companies in the industry?
Problem II-2. StartUp, Inc., is the only participant in a new market. The market is based on a product for which StartUp has a non-exclusive license from the inventor; that is, StartUp cannot prevent others from obtaining a similar license. Nonetheless, StartUp has exhaustively researched the demand for the product, has concluded that a market exists, and has worked to stimulate demand. As a result, it has both "made" a market for the product and developed a comprehensive list of customers.

Thaddeus, a sales representative for StartUp, leaves to found his own company. He gets a license to make the product from its inventor. He takes with him from StartUp the customer list he worked with as an employee, his personal knowledge of and contacts with specific customers, and StartUp's knowledge of the market. StartUp sues Thaddeus for misappropriation of trade secrets. What result?

Problem II-3. Research Co. is a major pharmaceutical company working on a cure for certain types of cancer. Derek is a molecular biologist employed by Research. After several years on the job, Derek leaves Research for Conglomerate, Inc., another pharmaceutical company, which has decided to work on the same cancer cure. At the time Derek leaves, Research has not been successful in finding a cancer cure. However, as a result of his work at Research, Derek is able to help Conglomerate avoid several unproductive avenues of research. Aided in part by this knowledge, Conglomerate (using scientists other than Derek) develops a cancer cure before Research. Research sues Conglomerate, alleging misappropriation of trade secrets. Does Research have a case?

Problem II-4. The Church of True Belief is a religious group founded around a set of closely guarded scriptural materials supposedly handed down to Church's elders from Church's deity. After a bitter theological dispute, a group of adherents leaves the church to form the House of Absolute Belief. They take with them a copy of Church's confidential scriptures, which they rely on in gaining adherents and founding the new House. Church sues House for misappropriation of trade secrets.

At trial, the issue is whether the scriptures qualify as a trade secret. The evidence indicates that the scriptures had never before been removed from the confines of Church, that both Church and House are tax-exempt nonprofit organizations which rely on donations for their funding, and that Church (but not House) rations access to the scriptures in proportion to the size of an adherent's donation.

Can the scriptures qualify as a trade secret? Does your answer depend on whether the governing law is the UTSA, the Restatement of Torts, or the Restatement (THIRD) OF UNFAIR COMPETITION?

Problem II-5. Pear Computer Corporation, known for its obsessive secrecy, password protects all its files. Can the password itself be a trade secret? Does it matter whether the UTSA or the Restatement applies?


^[23] Mallet contends that its trade secrets are adequately identified because of the following series of steps: (1) the District Court's order granting an injunction was based on the Court's Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law \& Order deciding a preliminary injunction was warranted; (2) the Court's Finding of Fact 98 -stating that "Lacayo had access to, and was intimately familiar with, Mallet's protectable information."; (3) those seventeen paragraphs in Mallet's Proposed Findings of Fact-the contents of which summarized broadly that Lacayo had access to and knowledge of trade secret information; (4) all of those exhibits are declarations and excerpts of deposition testimony that themselves attach exhibits; and (5) somewhere in there are trade secrets. At oral argument, Mallet cited a range of documents as proof that it had specified its trade secrets. Circumstances such as access to trade secrets, unusually accelerated or lowcost development of a competing product, and relative lack of prior expertise, may, in combination, establish a likelihood of success on the element of misappropriation, see Oakwood, 999 F.3d 908, 911-12.
^[25] Though our decision relies on the District Court's findings of fact, we note that on remand the Court is not bound by its initial findings and should again carefully assess the evidentiary record, weighing all conflicting evidence. We offer two examples of findings that give us pause, at least as presently explained. First, extensive evidence was introduced showing that many of both Mallet's and Synova's products were single ingredient oils, some of which were simply repackaged for sale. Given that, we hesitate to agree with the District Court that the testimony relating to unformulated pure oils is a "red herring" and immaterial to Mallet's right to relief. As of December 7, 2020, repackaged mineral oils constituted approximately half of Synova's Supra and Primo series. Further, we wonder whether a single naturally occurring ingredient can be repackaged as a product and then be considered a formula warranting trade secret protection, but we leave that for consideration in the first instance on remand.
^4 Another reason for limiting common law protection to secret information may be concern over preemption of state common law by the federal intellectual property laws. Federal courts have generally held that state laws that create property rights in public information are preempted by the patent and copyright laws. There are two rationales for such preemption. First, federal laws reflect a judgment that unpatentable inventions ought to belong to the public. Second, preemption "channels" inventions into one or another form of protection. We focus on federal preemption in in Chapters II(H), III(K), and VI(A).