
Corporate law establishes the structure of the corporation as well as important rules that support the structure. In particular, it provides for a system of centralized management of the corporation's business and affairs by the corporate board of directors. Moreover, corporate law helps minimize the divergence of interests among corporate constituencies, and in particular, between the corporate managers who have broad discretion over managing the corporation and the investors who are pooling their money. This divergence of interest is described by economists as an "agency problem" that lurks whenever the welfare of a "principal" depends on the actions taken by another party, the "agent." Agency problems arise in many contexts. In the corporate context, agency theorists describe shareholders as the owners of the corporation and directors as the shareholders' agents, who are entrusted by corporation law with managing the business and affairs of the corporation. As such, shareholders are rationally concerned that their agents - the directors-might be tempted to misuse their management power to further their own interests, rather than the interest of the shareholders. For example, directors may slack or even steal, risking the shareholders' investment. If this agency problem cannot be minimized ex ante, investors will be reluctant to invest their money, hampering the growth of companies and the overall economy.

As we will see, agency problems can be addressed privately, through contractual arrangements (for example, providing directors with share ownership to align their financial interests with those of shareholders), or through legal rules. Indeed, much of corporate law is thought to be in service of minimizing agency costs. For example, corporate law provides that directors owe fiduciary duties to the corporation and its shareholders, a topic that is at the center of our discussion in Chapter 4. Relevant to this chapter, if corporate management fails to promote the shareholders' interests, shareholders can exert discipline using their voting rights, or they can sell, particularly if there is a public market for the corporation's shares. We will return to the topic of agency costs at many points throughout the book.