
The eighteenth-century German philosopher Immanuel Kant developed the most nuanced and influential account of human autonomy, from which he explained the working of various private legal rights. See Arthur R. Ripstein, Force and Freedom: Kant's Legal and Political Philosophy (2009). In a 1785 essay, Kant deployed some of these insights to copyright protection. See Immanuel Kant, On the Wrongfulness of Unauthorized Publication of Books, in Practical Philosophy 27, 29-35 (Mary J. Gregor ed. \& trans., Cambridge 1996) (1785). Drawing on an autonomydriven theory that is independent of property, Kant contends that unauthorized publication of another's work is morally problematic and therefore legitimately the basis of a private action (i.e., for copyright infringement). Id. at 34-35.

According to Kant, when an author expresses herself in a book, that expression is more than just a commodity. It is instead a form of communication, something he terms a "speech act." Control over the speech act is distinct from the ownership of the book. When a publisher prints a book, that publisher is purporting to act on behalf of the author by speaking in her name publicly. Such behavior is unproblematic when authorized by the author, since the publisher is then the legitimate voice of the author. When the publication is altogether unauthorized, however, the publisher is now speaking as the author without her consent. This in turn forces the author to commit a speech act against her own will by either acknowledging the existence of such speech or taking responsibility for it. Such unauthorized publication therefore interferes with the individual autonomy of the author as a moral agent to speak on her own terms, rendering it wrongful and thus potentially actionable. Copyright law, in this understanding, exists to safeguard an author's autonomy as speaker interacting with the public.

## COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS

1. Does Kant's autonomy-based theory have any applicability beyond the domain of copyright law? While Kant focused most immediately on copyright law, could his idea be extended to other forms of intellectual property rights that implicate the individual self, such as rights of publicity? See Alice Haemmerli, Whose Who? The Case for a Kantian Right of Publicity, 49 DUKE L.J. 383 (1999).

Even within the domain of copyright law, does Kant's theory sufficiently explain the full extent of modern copyright doctrine? Are performances, displays, and distributions-forms of infringement today-equally forms of speech under Kant's account? See Abraham DRASSINOWER, WHAT'S WRONG WITH COPYING? (2015).
2. One of the most notable features of Kant's theory is that it purports to justify copyright without reference to the consequences of the regime and its effects, i.e., consequentialism. In other words, it develops a defense for the regime from within by focusing on the irreducibility of human autonomy as a value. This form of justification is often referred to as an "immanent" defense of the system. See Shyamkrishna Balganesh, The Immanent Rationality of Copyright Law, 115 MiCH. L. REV. 1047 (2017) (reviewing Drassinower's account). Are other intellectual property regimes besides copyright capable a similar immanent defense? Is there an autonomy right to one's own name and likeness, for instance? See Chapter VI(D).
3. Does the notion of author autonomy suggest that intellectual property and privacy concerns are related? Should intellectual property regimes such as copyright give greater weight to an individual's desire to have their expression stay out of public scrutiny? Compare Shyamkrishna Balganesh, Privative Copyright, 73 VAND. L. REV. 1 (2020) (arguing that copyright law does and should continue to recognize the role of privacy concerns) with Eric Goldman \& Jessica Silbey, Copyright's Memory Hole, 2019 BYU L. R3v. 929 (2020) (arguing for a more limited recognition of privacy concerns within copyright).
4. Copyright cases often feature not just rote copying, but defendants who engage in their own speech modifying or commenting on the copyright owner's expression. Do those defendants have autonomy rights in their speech too? If the autonomy right is morally defensible regardless of consequence, how are we to balance those interests?
