
More recently, the idea of distributive justice has entered the fray in theoretical discussions of intellectual property. While it is rarely offered up as a standalone justification, it is usually discussed in the construction and application of different intellectual property regimes. Put simply, principles of distributive justice" are seen as "providing moral guidance for the political processes and structures that affect the distribution of benefits and burdens in societies, and any principles which do offer this kind of moral guidance on distribution, regardless of the terminology they employ, should be considered principles of distributive justice." Julian Lamont \& Christi Favor, Distributive Justice, in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Edward N. Zalta ed., Winter 2017).

At its root, distributive justice derives from a strong commitment to equality. In A THEORY OF JUSTICE (1971)—probably the most influential work of political philosophy written in the past century-John Rawls offers an "ideal contractarian" theory of distributive shares. To determine the just allocation of the benefits and burdens of social life, he asks what distributive principles suitably disinterested persons would choose. To ask what selfish people would want, or what social contract would actually result from a convocation of all members of society, Rawls argues, would ensure that the naturally smart or strong, or people who shared a particular race, nationality, religion, or ideology, dominated the rest, if any agreement could be reached at all. Rawls rejects this construction of the "original position" for choosing social rules-which more libertarian philosophers, such as David Gauthier, come closer to favoring-because he finds this consequence intuitively unacceptable. He assumes instead that the resources and opportunities a person should have available should not depend primarily on how fortunate he or she was in the natural lottery of talents and parents, or in what group that person happens to be born.

Rawls, therefore, tries to determine principles that rational people behind a "veil of ignorance" would choose. Rawls contends that the veil must be quite opaque. It must, for example, exclude from the minds of those choosing principles of justice all knowledge of their own abilities, desires, parentage, and social stratum.

Rawls concludes that people behind the veil of ignorance would adopt what he calls the "difference principle." They would agree, he says, that the fundamental institutions of society should be arranged so that the distribution of "primary goods"-not only wealth, income, and opportunities for work or leisure, but also what Rawls terms the "bases of self-respect"-is to the maximal advantage of a representative member of the least advantaged social class. Defining the least advantaged class and the proper set of primary goods is difficult and contentious. In Political Liberalism (1993), Rawls refines his theory of distributive justice in the following passage:
[M]easures are required to assure that the basic needs of all citizens can be met so that they can take part in political and social life.

About this last point, the idea is not that of satisfying needs as opposed to mere desires and wants; nor is it that of redistribution in favor of greater equality. The constitutional essential here is rather that below a certain level of material and social well-being, and of training and education, people simply cannot take part in society as citizens, much less equal citizens.
Id. at 166 .
Within intellectual property, distributive justice ideals are often used to determine the allocation of rights, liabilities and immunities among different actors. Distributive justice principles here ordinarily operate by identifying a particular class of actors who require a specific kind of rule, independent of the rules that affect society more generally. An example here is the additional protection that copyright law offers the authors and their heirs by way of its rules relating to termination of transfers. Here, the motivating idea is that authors and their heirs may require additional financial protection multiple decades (thirty-five years) after the initial transfer.

Closely related to-but somewhat distinct from-distributive justice is the idea of "social justice" that some scholars have used to describe the commitment to equality and fairness in the working of intellectual property regimes. While this idea is inchoate and less structured, it is more expansive and of wide application. Legal scholars Lateef Mtima and Steven Jamar describe the idea as follows:

Social justice is a protean concept that varies with circumstances. It includes the aspirational ideal of substantive equality as well as the relatively easily addressable procedural equality. Social justice includes at least some aspects of individual liberty (e.g., autonomy) as well as incorporating some communitarian liberty values such as religious association, pursuit of legitimate group interests, and civic virtues such as voting. Social justice includes not only access to, but also inclusion in, the social, cultural, and economic life of the country. Indeed, it extends beyond inclusion in social, cultural, and economic life to full participation in and ability to affect the direction of civil society in all its manifestations. Social justice thus rests upon the core values of equality, liberty, and advancing the general welfare enshrined in the Declaration of Independence and Preamble to the U.S. Constitution. . . .

In the field of intellectual property, social justice includes the ability to enjoy the fruits of others at some base level of procedural equality (equal access to the works of others) and, to a lesser but important extent, the ability to have some base level of substantive equality in the beneficial impact of intellectual property created by others. Even more importantly, social justice in the area of intellectual property extends beyond mere access and beyond mere passive observation or enjoyment of others' works (e.g., listening to a recording or seeing a movie): it includes the ability to participate in the creation and exploitation of intellectual property both in a procedurally fair way and a substantively significant way.
Lateef Mtima \& Steven D. Jamar, Fulfilling the Copyright Social Justice Promise: Digitizing Textual Information, 55 N.Y.L.S.L. Rev. 77, 83-84 (2010).
# COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS 

1. Do you agree with Rawls that people behind the veil of ignorance would agree that the fundamental institutions of society should be arranged so that the distribution of "primary goods"-including property-is to the maximal advantage of a representative member of the least advantaged social class? Would you agree to this principle if you were behind a veil of ignorance?

Consider political scientist James Q. Wilson's critique:
[E]verybody in Rawls's universe is averse to risk; each wants to make certain that, if he winds up on the bottom of the heap, the bottom is as attractive as possible.

But many people are in fact not averse to risk, they are risk takers; to them, a just society would be one in which inequalities in wealth were acceptable provided that the people at the top of the heap got there as a result of effort and skill. And even people who are not risk takers may endorse this position because they think it fair that rewards should be proportional to effort, even if some people lose out entirely. (These same people might also expect their church or government to take care of those who lost out.) They have this view of fairness because they recognize that people differ in talent, energy, temperament, and interests; that conflicts among such people are inevitable; and that matching, as best one can, rewards to contributions is the best way of handling that conflict.

Equality is a special and, as it turns out, rare and precarious case of equity. Settled living, and in particular the accumulation of private property, makes equality of outcomes impossible because inequality of contributions become manifest. The task of settled societies is to devise ways of assuring that outcomes are proportional to worth, reasonably defined.
JAMES Q. WILSON, THE MORAL SENSE 73-76 (1993); see also ERIC RAKOWKSI, EQUAL JUSTICE (1991) (advocating a more meritocratic "equality of fortune" that affords all members of society a just initial distribution of resources but tolerates inequalities resulting from exercise of free will-notably, occupational preferences, wise business decisions, and diligence in school, training, and work).
2. Justifying Intellectual Property. At a basic level, technological advance produces higher standards of living. It enables society to accomplish more with fewer resources and therefore increases productivity. Furthermore, no one is required to purchase IPprotected goods. Therefore, in an exchange economy, only those who value such goods more than their cost will purchase the goods. Moreover, patent and copyright protection eventually expire. At a coarse level of granularity, modern societies have the benefit of all manner of innovation and creativity-from sanitation technologies that support safe drinking water to telecommunications and modern medicines. As such, innovation tends to reduce poverty and raise standards of living in an absolute sense over the long run. Professor Merges argues that a Rawlsian perspective can therefore justify IP rights in broad brush. See Robert P. MERgEs, Justifying Intellectual Property (2011).
He also identified a series of "mid-level principles"-nonremoval from the public domain, proportionality of IP rights to value or significance of the work covered by the right, economic efficiency, and respect for the dignity of the author-that seek to balance the interests of creators and users of IP. See also Peter S. Menell, Intellectual Property and Social Justice: Mapping the Next Frontier, in Steven D. Jamar \& LATEEF Mtima (Eds), HANDBOOK OF InTELLECTUAL PROPERTY AND SOCIAL JUSTICE: ACCESS, INCLUSION, EMPOWERMENT (2023).
3. Access to Medicine. The argument that intellectual property protection increases productivity and eventually becomes available to all affords little solace to those who cannot afford to purchase patented, life-saving medicines. Should the patent rights give way for life-saving medicines and treatments? To what extent would such a rule undermine the race to discover cures for disease? Is unequal access to medicine best addressed through social insurance institutions? See William W. Fisher \& Talha Syed, Global Justice in Healthcare: Developing Drugs for the Developing World, 40 U.C. DAVIS L. REV. 581 (2007).
4. Access to Culture and Cumulative Creativity. We can also see distributive values in the broadening of expressive opportunities for authors and artists. Since expression often builds on and reacts to prior expressive works, such distributive values can run counter to the provision of exclusive rights. Limiting doctrines and the fair use privilege implicitly cross-subsidizes cumulative creators. Such freedom to build on the work of others can, however, adversely affect authors' moral and dignitary interests. See Molly Shaffer Van Houweling, Distributive Values in Copyright, 83 TEX. L. REV. 1535 (2005); Peter S. Menell, Adapting Copyright for the Mashup Generation, 164 U. PA. L. REV. 441 (2016)
5. IP and Inequality. While the digital revolution has provided especially rapid technological advance, it has also contributed to skewing of wealth distribution. Like the technological advances of the Industrial Revolution, the Digital Revolution of the past several decades-characterized by scalability of information technologies, network effects, and displacement of labor by smart machines-has produced a new Gilded Age. Many of the wealthiest people in the world are technology entrepreneurs. The sports and entertainment professions, which depend critically upon copyright, trademark, and publicity right protections, also contribute to high wealth for a relatively small "superstar" class.
6. Gender and Racial Equality. The concentration of wealth and economic leverage that intellectual property produces places vast power in the hands of a relatively small group of entrepreneurs and their representatives. The class of venture capitalists, corporate titans, and Hollywood moguls reflect historical gender and race biases. See K.J. Greene, Intellectual Property at the Intersection of Race and Gender: Lady Sings the Blues, 16 Am. U. J. GENDER, SOC. Pol'y \& L. 365 (2008). Yet copyright protection has been especially effective in providing whatever limited "equality of opportunity" Black people in America have enjoyed in the United States. Indeed, copyright has been the most important form of property for many of the wealthiest black families. See Justin Hughes \& Robert P. Merges, Copyright and Distributive Justice, 92 Notre Dame L.
REV. 513 (2016). At the same time, IP raises the cost of music and other content, and that disadvantages the poor, who are disproportionately non-white.

Moreover, adequately funded and well-produced film, art, music, and literature play an inestimable role in promoting social and cultural understanding and tolerance. As much as lawyers emphasize the role of legal advocacy in shifting the law, the television series Will and Grace likely had more influence in shifting the nation's and Supreme Court's views on gay marriage than anything that lawyers argued. Similarly, works such as To Kill A MockingBird and The Help powerfully communicated the indignity of the Jim Crow South. The public's gradual embrace of R\&B, jazz, and gospel-what was once referred to as "race music"-played a critical role in building a more cohesive and inclusive nation. See K.J. Greene, "Copynorms," Black Cultural Protection, and the Debate over African-American Reparations, 25 Cardozo ARTS \& EnT. L.J. 1179 (2008). At the same time, art and literature can also reinforce stereotypes. The ability to challenge, rework, and criticize canons of literature may be critical to interrogating and undermining those stereotypes.
7. IP and the Environment. While motivating the development of better environmental technologies, the patent system potentially constrains the diffusion of technological advances that seek to ameliorate environmental harms. Even if advances in wind turbine and solar technologies dramatically lowered the cost of producing electricity, distributing that energy to consumers depends critically upon a grid infrastructure that can move decentralized sources of electricity to market. Moreover, such energy must compete with harmful alternatives. Without fees to internalize those harmful effects, renewable sources of energy face a competitive disadvantage. Thus, intellectual property cannot be the sole policy to address problems like pollution and climate change. Prizes, subsidies, and externality-internalizing fees on fossil fuels offer complementary tools for balancing the R\&D appropriability problem, the environmental externalities of fossil fuel consumption, and the geopolitical distortions of reliance on oil. See Peter S. Menell \& Sarah M. Tran, Intellectual Property, Innovation AND THE ENVIRONMENT (2014).
8. IP and Colonialism. Locke and Hegel reflect a classical European view of the world as a set of raw materials ready to be harvested, worked, and owned by the enlightened colonists. In real property, that view produced an era of colonial empires that few would want to replicate today. Is there an analogous problem with asserting dominion over the intangible resources of the commons? Several scholars have argued that there is something wrong with taking traditional knowledge from the developing world and turning it into an IP right owned by those in the developed world who "discovered" it. See Evana Wright, Protecting Traditional Knowledge: Lesson from Global Case Studies (2020); Srividhya Ragavan, Protection of Traditional Knowledge, 2 Minn. Intell. Prop. Rev. 1 (2001); Vandana Shiva, BiOPIRACY: THE Plunder of Nature and KNOWLEDGE (1997). Perhaps ironically, many of those scholars argue for IP rights in traditional knowledge to permit local peoples to engage in appropriation of their own. See Stephen R. Munzer \& Kal Raustiala, The Uneasy Case for Intellectual Property Rights in Traditional Knowledge, 27 Cardozo ARTS \& EnT. L.J. 37 (2009).
