
Frequently, you not only will want to discover information from the deponent, but you also will want to pin the deponent down and to commit the deponent unequivocally to a particular position, theory, or version of the facts. Sometimes you already will have the information you need and your sole purpose may be to commit the deponent. One reason to do this is for use in a dispositive motion. Another reason is to commit a witness or party to their testimony before they hear or become aware of testimony, information, or theories you intend to propound through other witnesses and other sources.

When you want to pin down your deponent, your questioning style must change. Rather than broad, brief, open-ended questions, you will want to ask narrow and more directed questions. The idea is to commit the deponent and to foreclose any possibility of the deponent testifying at a later date to something new or different without obviously contradicting the earlier deposition testimony.

## Key to Pinning Down the Deponent

> Use progressively narrower questions > Foreclose all possible escape routes > Use leading questions before concluding > Be serious and more assertive The style best suited to pinning down a deponent generally is a serious, formal, and more assertive style, similar to the style you might use during crossexamination. Maintain a serious tone and demeanor, be especially vigilant about maintaining steady eye contact, even to the extent that you do not look at your pad to write notes, and consider picking up the pace of your questions. You do not necessarily need to be hostile or unpleasant; generally, it is best not to start out that way. If the witness is hostile or remains nonresponsive, then you may transition to a more aggressive and less patient style. ^7 It is difficult, however, to move convincingly from an aggressive style to the pleasant kind of style that is more suited to general information gathering. The witness is unlikely to see you as warm and friendly after you have been stern and confrontational. Therefore, especially if you also are using your deposition for broad discovery purposes, consider deferring these cross-examination type questions until later in the deposition.
