
Halo Electronics, Inc. v. Pulse Electronics, Inc. Stryker Corp. v. Zimmer, Inc. Supreme Court of the United States 579 U.S. 93 (2016)

CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS delivered the opinion of the Court.
Section 284 of the Patent Act provides that, in a case of infringement, courts "may increase the damages up to three times the amount found or assessed." 35 U.S.C. §284. In In re Seagate Technology, LLC, 497 F. 3d 1360 (2007) (en banc), the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit adopted a two-part test for determining when a district court may increase damages pursuant to §284. Under Seagate, a patent owner must first "show by clear and convincing evidence that the infringer acted despite an objectively high likelihood that its actions constituted infringement of a valid patent." Id., at 1371. Second, the patentee must demonstrate, again by clear and convincing evidence, that the risk of infringement "was either known or so obvious that it should have been known to the accused infringer." Ibid. The question before us is whether this test is consistent with §284. We hold that it is not.

I A Enhanced damages are as old as U.S. patent law. The Patent Act of 1793 mandated treble damages in any successful infringement suit. See Patent Act of 1793, §5, 1 Stat. 322. In the Patent Act of 1836, however, Congress changed course and made enhanced damages discretionary, specifying that "it shall be in the power of the court to render judgment for any sum above the amount found by [the] verdict . . . not exceeding three times the amount thereof, according to the circumstances of the case." Patent Act of 1836, §14, 5 Stat. 123. In construing that new provision, this Court explained that the change was prompted by the "injustice" of subjecting a "defendant who acted in ignorance or good faith" to the same treatment as the "wanton and malicious pirate." Seymour v. McCormick, 16 How. 480, 488 (1854). There "is no good reason," we observed, "why taking a man's property in an invention should be trebly punished, while the measure of damages as to other property is single and actual damages." Id., at 488489. But "where the injury is wanton or malicious, a jury may inflict vindictive or exemplary damages, not to recompense the plaintiff, but to punish the defendant." Id., at 489. . . .

In 1870, Congress amended the Patent Act, but preserved district court discretion to award up to treble damages "according to the circumstances of the case." Patent Act of 1870, §59, 16 Stat. 207. We continued to describe enhanced damages as "vindictive or punitive," which the court may "inflict" when "the circumstances of the case appear to require it." Tilghman v. Proctor, 125 U.S. 136, 143-144 (1888); Topliff v. Topliff, 145 U.S. 156, 174 (1892) (infringer knowingly sold copied technology of his former employer). At the same time, we reiterated that there was no basis for increased damages where " [t] here is no pretence of any wanton and wilful breach" and "nothing that suggests punitive damages, or that shows wherein the defendant was damnified other than by the loss of the profits which the plaintiff received." Cincinnati Siemens-Lungren Gas Illuminating Co. v. Western Siemens-Lungren Co., 152 U.S. 200, 204 (1894)....

Some early decisions did suggest that enhanced damages might serve to compensate patentees as well as to punish infringers. See, e.g., Clark v. Wooster, 119 U.S. 322, 326 (1886) (noting that " [t] here may be damages beyond" licensing fees "but these are more properly the subjects" of enhanced damage awards). Such statements, however, were not for the ages, in part because the merger of law and equity removed certain procedural obstacles to full compensation absent enhancement. See generally 7 CHISLM ON Patents §20.03[4][b][iii] (2011). In the main, moreover, the references to compensation concerned costs attendant to litigation. See Clark, 119 U.S., at 326 (identifying enhanced damages as compensation for "the expense and trouble the plaintiff has been put to"). That concern dissipated with the enactment in 1952 of 35 U.S.C. §285, which authorized district courts to award reasonable attorney's fees to prevailing parties in "exceptional cases" under the Patent Act. See Octane Fitness, LLC v. ICON Health \& Fitness Inc., 572 U.S. 545, 549 (2014).

It is against this backdrop that Congress, in the 1952 codification of the Patent Act, enacted §284. "The stated purpose" of the 1952 revision "was merely reorganization in language to clarify the statement of the statutes." Aro Mfg. Co. v. Convertible Top Replacement Co., 377 U.S. 476, 505, n. 20 (1964) (internal quotation marks omitted). This Court accordingly described §284-consistent with the history of enhanced damages under the Patent Act-as providing that "punitive or 'increased damages" could be recovered "in a case of willful or bad-faith infringement." Id., at 508; see also Dowling v. United States, 473 U.S. 207, 227, n. 19 (1985) ("willful infringement"); Florida Prepaid Postsecondary Ed. Expense Bd. v. College Savings Bank, 527 U.S. 627. 648, n. 11 (1999) (describing §284 damages as "punitive").

# B 

In 2007, the Federal Circuit decided Seagate and fashioned the test for enhanced damages now before us. Under Seagate, a plaintiff seeking enhanced damages must show that the infringement of his patent was "willful." 497 F. 3d. at 1368. The Federal Circuit announced a two-part test to establish such willfulness: First, "a patentee must show by clear and convincing evidence that the infringer acted despite an objectively high likelihood that its actions constituted infringement of a valid patent," without regard to " [t] he state of mind of the accused infringer." Id., at 1371. This objectively defined risk is to be "determined by the record developed in the infringement proceedings." Ibid. "Objective recklessness will not be found" at this first step if the accused infringer, during the infringement proceedings, "raise[s] a 'substantial question' as to the validity or noninfringement of the patent." Bard Peripheral l'ascular, Inc. v. W. L. Gore \& Assoc., Inc., 776 F. 3d 837, 844 (CA Fed. 2015). That categorical bar applies even if the defendant was unaware of the arguable defense when he acted. See Seagate, 497 F. 3d, at 1371.
Second, after establishing objective recklessness, a patentee must show-again by clear and convincing evidence-that the risk of infringement "was either known or so obvious that it should have been known to the accused infringer." Seagate, 497 F. 3d, at 1371. Only when both steps have been satisfied can the district court proceed to consider whether to exercise its discretion to award enhanced damages. Ibid.

Under Federal Circuit precedent, an award of enhanced damages is subject to trifurcated appellate review. The first step of Seagate-objective recklessness-is reviewed de novo; the second-subjective knowledge-for substantial evidence; and the ultimate decision-whether to award enhanced damages-for abuse of discretion. See Bard Peripheral Vascular, Inc. v. W. L. Gore \& Assoc., Inc., 682 F. 3d 1003, 1005, 1008 (CA Fed. 2012).

# C 

1
Petitioner Halo Electronics, Inc., and respondents Pulse Electronics, Inc. supply electronic components. 769 F. 3d 1371, 1374-1375 (CA Fed. 2014). Halo alleges that Pulse infringed its patents for electronic packages containing transformers designed to be mounted to the surface of circuit boards. Id., at 1374. In 2002, Halo sent Pulse two letters offering to license Halo's patents. Id., at 1376. After one of its engineers concluded that Halo's patents were invalid, Pulse continued to sell the allegedly infringing products. Ibid.

In 2007, Halo sued Pulse. Ibid. The jury found that Pulse had infringed Halo's patents, and that there was a high probability it had done so willfully. Ibid. The District Court, however, declined to award enhanced damages under §284, after determining that Pulse had at trial presented a defense that "was not objectively baseless, or a 'sham.'" App. to Pet. for Cert. in No. 14-1513, p. 64a (quoting Bard, 682 F. 3d, at 1007). Thus, the court concluded, Halo had failed to show objective recklessness under the first step of Seagate. The Federal Circuit affirmed.

## 2

Petitioners Stryker Corporation, Stryker Puerto Rico, Ltd., and Stryker Sales Corporation (collectively, Stryker) and respondents Zimmer, Inc., and Zimmer Surgical, Inc. (collectively, Zimmer), compete in the market for orthopedic pulsed lavage devices. A pulsed lavage device is a combination spray gun and suction tube, used to clean tissue during surgery. In 2010, Stryker sued Zimmer for patent infringement. The jury found that Zimmer had willfully infringed Stryker's patents and awarded Stryker $70 million in lost profits. The District Court added $6.1 million in supplemental damages and then trebled the total sum under §284, resulting in an award of over $228 million.

Specifically, the District Court noted, the jury had heard testimony that Zimmer had "all-but instructed its design team to copy Stryker's products," and had chosen a "high-risk/high-reward strategy of competing immediately and aggressively in the pulsed lavage market," while "opt[ing] to worry about the potential legal consequences later." "[T]reble damages [were] appropriate," the District Court concluded, "[g]iven the one-sidedness of the case and the flagrancy and scope of Zimmer's infringement."
The Federal Circuit affirmed the judgment of infringement but vacated the award of treble damages. 782 F. 3d, at 662 . Applying de novo review, the court concluded that enhanced damages were unavailable because Zimmer had asserted "reasonable defenses" at trial. We granted certiorari in both cases and now vacate and remand.

II A The pertinent text of §284 provides simply that "the court may increase the damages up to three times the amount found or assessed." 35 U.S.C. §284. That language contains no explicit limit or condition, and we have emphasized that the "word 'may' clearly connotes discretion." Martin v. Franklin Capital Corp., 546 U.S. 132, 136 (2005) (quoting Fogerty v. Fantasy, Inc., 510 U.S. 517, 533 (1994)).

At the same time, "[d]iscretion is not whim." Martin, 546 U.S., at 139. "[I]n a system of laws discretion is rarely without limits," even when the statute "does not specify any limits upon the district courts' discretion." Flight Attendants v. Zipes, 491 U.S. 754,758 (1989). "[A] motion to a court's discretion is a motion, not to its inclination, but to its judgment; and its judgment is to be guided by sound legal principles." Martin, 546 U S., at 139 (quoting United States v. Burr, 25 F. Cas. 30, 35 (No. 14,692d) (CC Va. 1807) (Marshall, C. J.); alteration omitted). Thus, although there is "no precise rule or formula" for awarding damages under §284, a district court's "discretion should be exercised in light of the considerations" underlying the grant of that discretion. Octane Fitness, 572 U.S., at 554 (quoting Fogerty, 510 U.S., at 534).

Awards of enhanced damages under the Patent Act over the past 180 years establish that they are not to be meted out in a typical infringement case, but are instead designed as a "punitive" or "vindictive" sanction for egregious infringement behavior. The sort of conduct warranting enhanced damages has been variously described in our cases as willful, wanton, malicious, bad-faith, deliberate, consciously wrongful, flagrant, or-indeed-characteristic of a pirate. District courts enjoy discretion in deciding whether to award enhanced damages, and in what amount. But through nearly two centuries of discretionary awards and review by appellate tribunals, "the channel of discretion ha[s] narrowed," Friendly, Indiscretion About Discretion, 31 EMORY L.J. 747, 772 (1982), so that such damages are generally reserved for egregious cases of culpable behavior.

B The Seagate test reflects, in many respects, a sound recognition that enhanced damages are generally appropriate under §284 only in egregious cases. That test, however, "is unduly rigid, and it impermissibly encumbers the statutory grant of discretion to district courts." Octane Fitness, 572 U.S., at 553 (construing $285 of the Patent Act). In particular, it can have the effect of insulating some of the worst patent infringers from any liability for enhanced damages.

1
The principal problem with Seagate's two-part test is that it requires a finding of objective recklessness in every case before district courts may award enhanced damages. Such a threshold requirement excludes from discretionary punishment many of the most culpable offenders, such as the "wanton and malicious pirate" who intentionally infringes another's patent-with no doubts about its validity or any notion of a defense-for no purpose other than to steal the patentee's business. Seymour, 16 How. at 488. Under Seagate, a district court may not even consider enhanced damages for such a pirate, unless the court first determines that his infringement was "objectively" reckless. In the context of such deliberate wrongdoing, however, it is not clear why an independent showing of objective recklessness-by clear and convincing evidence, no less-should be a prerequisite to enhanced damages. Our recent decision in Octane Fitness arose in a different context but points in the same direction. In that case we considered §285 of the Patent Act, which allows district courts to award attorney's fees to prevailing parties in "exceptional" cases. 35 U.S.C. §285. The Federal Circuit had adopted a two-part test for determining when a case qualified as exceptional, requiring that the claim asserted be both objectively baseless and brought in subjective bad faith. We rejected that test on the ground that a case presenting "subjective bad faith" alone could "sufficiently set itself apart from mine-run cases to warrant a fee award." 572 U.S., at 555 . So too here. The subjective willfulness of a patent infringer, intentional or knowing, may warrant enhanced damages, without regard to whether his infringement was objectively reckless.

The Seagate test aggravates the problem by making dispositive the ability of the infringer to muster a reasonable (even though unsuccessful) defense at the infringement trial. The existence of such a defense insulates the infringer from enhanced damages, even if he did not act on the basis of the defense or was even aware of it. Under that standard, someone who plunders a patent-infringing it without any reason to suppose his conduct is arguably defensible-can nevertheless escape any come-uppance under §284 solely on the strength of his attorney's ingenuity.

But culpability is generally measured against the knowledge of the actor at the time of the challenged conduct. See generally Restatement (SECOND) of Torts §8A (1965) ("intent" denotes state of mind in which "the actor desires to cause consequences of his act" or "believes" them to be "substantially certain to result from it"); W. KEETON, D. Dobbs, R. Keeton, \& D. Owen, Prosser and Keeton on Law of Torts §34, p. 212 (5th ed. 1984) (describing willful, wanton, and reckless as "look[ing] to the actor's real or supposed state of mind"); see also Kolstad v. American Dental Assn., 527 U.S. 526, 538 (1999) ("Most often . . eligibility for punitive awards is characterized in terms of a defendant's motive or intent"). In Safeco Ins. Co. of America v. Burr, 551 U.S. 47 (2007), we stated that a person is reckless if he acts "knowing or having reason to know of facts which would lead a reasonable man to realize" his actions are unreasonably risky. Id., at 69 (emphasis added and internal quotation marks omitted). The Court found that the defendant had not recklessly violated the Fair Credit Reporting Act because the defendant's interpretation had "a foundation in the statutory text" and the defendant lacked "the benefit of guidance from the courts of appeals or the Federal Trade Commission" that "might have warned it away from the view it took." Id., at 69-70.
Nothing in Safeco suggests that we should look to facts that the defendant neither knew nor had reason to know at the time he acted.*

Section 284 allows district courts to punish the full range of culpable behavior. Yet none of this is to say that enhanced damages must follow a finding of egregious misconduct. As with any exercise of discretion, courts should continue to take into account the particular circumstances of each case in deciding whether to award damages, and in what amount. Section 284 permits district courts to exercise their discretion in a manner free from the inelastic constraints of the Seagate test. Consistent with nearly two centuries of enhanced damages under patent law, however, such punishment should generally be reserved for egregious cases typified by willful misconduct.

2
The Seagate test is also inconsistent with §284 because it requires clear and convincing evidence to prove recklessness. On this point Octane Fitness is again instructive. There too the Federal Circuit had adopted a clear and convincing standard of proof, for awards of attorney's fees under $285 of the Patent Act. Because that provision supplied no basis for imposing such a heightened standard of proof, we rejected it. See Octane Fitness, 572 U.S., at 553. We do so here as well. Like $285,$284 "imposes no specific evidentiary burden, much less such a high one." Ibid. And the fact that Congress expressly erected a higher standard of proof elsewhere in the Patent Act. see 35 U.S.C. $273(~b), but not in §284, is telling. Furthermore, nothing in historical practice supports a heightened standard. As we explained in Octane Fitness, "patentinfringement litigation has always been governed by a preponderance of the evidence standard." 572 U.S., at 558-559. Enhanced damages are no exception.

3
Finally, because we eschew any rigid formula for awarding enhanced damages under §284, we likewise reject the Federal Circuit's tripartite framework for appellate review. In Highmark Inc. v. Allcare Health Management System, Inc., 572 U.S. 559 (2014), we built on our Octane Fitness holding to reject a similar multipart standard of review. Because Octane Fitness confirmed district court discretion to award attorney fees, we concluded that such decisions should be reviewed for abuse of discretion. Highmark, 572 U.S., at 563.

The same conclusion follows naturally from our holding here. Section 284 gives district courts discretion in meting out enhanced damages. It "commits the determination" whether enhanced damages are appropriate "to the discretion of the district court" and "that decision is to be reviewed on appeal for abuse of discretion." Id., at 563 .

That standard allows for review of district court decisions informed by "the considerations we have identified." Octane Fitness, 572 U.S., at 554. The appellate review framework adopted by the Federal Circuit reflects a concern that district courts may award enhanced damages too readily, and distort the balance between the protection of patent rights and the interest in technological innovation. Nearly two centuries of exercising discretion in awarding enhanced damages in patent cases, however, has given substance to the notion that there are limits to that discretion. The Federal Circuit should review such exercises of discretion in light of the longstanding considerations we have identified as having guided both Congress and the courts.

III ...[R]espondents' main argument for retaining the Seagate test comes down to a matter of policy. Respondents and their amici are concerned that allowing district courts unlimited discretion to award up to treble damages in infringement cases will impede innovation as companies steer well clear of any possible interference with patent rights. They also worry that the ready availability of such damages will embolden "trolls." Trolls, in the patois of the patent community, are entities that hold patents for the primary purpose of enforcing them against alleged infringers, often exacting outsized licensing fees on threat of litigation.

Respondents are correct that patent law reflects "a careful balance between the need to promote innovation" through patent protection, and the importance of facilitating the "imitation and refinement through imitation" that are "necessary to invention itself and the very lifeblood of a competitive economy." Bonito Boats, Inc. v. Thunder Craft Boats, Inc., 489 U.S. 141, 146 (1989). That balance can indeed be disrupted if enhanced damages are awarded in garden-variety cases. As we have explained, however, they should not be. The seriousness of respondents' policy concerns cannot justify imposing an artificial construct such as the Seagate test on the discretion conferred under §284.. . .

# COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS 

1. What types of conduct fall within the enhanced damages ambit? Is willfulness still required? Could other conduct give rise to an enhancement? What kinds of conduct?

Justice Breyer, joined by Justices Alito and Kennedy, concurred in the unanimous Halo decision but wrote separately to emphasize that "willful misconduct" does "not mean that a court may award enhanced damages simply because the evidence shows that the infringer knew about the patent and nothing more." They expressed the view that the Court's opinion should be read to mean that enhanced damages are appropriate "only in egregious cases"-characterized by bad-faith infringement, malicious piracy, or objective recklessness. They note that the owner of a small firm, or a scientist, engineer, or technician working there, could, "without being 'wanton' or 'reckless,' reasonably determine that its product does not infringe a particular patent, or that that patent is probably invalid." They further highlight that the proliferation of demand letters by patent assertion entities ought not to impose undue investigative burdens on the many businesses, hospitals, and individuals targeted.

The Federal Circuit picked up on that concurrence in its articulation of the willfulness standard and the allocation of decisionmaking authority between the jury and judge. See SRI Int'l v. Cisco Sys., 14 F.4th 1323 (Fed. Cir. 2021). It holds that only intent to infringe or willful blindness is required for a jury to find willful infringement. But willful infringement alone is not enough to enhance damages. If a jury finds willfulness, the decision whether to enhance damages is left to the district judge's discretion. The judge may consider the willfulness finding, but to enhance damages must also conclude that the defendant engaged in "egregious conduct" such as "wanton, malicious, and bad faith" behavior.
2. The Seagate two-part test reduced the need for companies to obtain opinion letters because they could rely instead on a plausible, although ultimately unsuccessful, legal defense. Does Halo make such letters more important? Justice Breyer sought to downplay the need for such letters, but is that a prudent approach?
3. The Seagate "objective reasonableness" prong afforded district judges greater leeway to reject enhanced damages at the summary judgment stage and to limit wideranging discovery into the defendant's intent. Will Halo re-open that discovery Pandora's Box and make it difficult to resolve willfulness prior to trial? Might a hasty or unduly cautious email create treble exposure?
4. A common critique of willfulness doctrine pre-Seagate was that it created a disincentive for research and development staff to read competitors' patents. (It was thought that this practice would establish a company's knowledge of a patented invention, leading to a finding of willful infringement and the attendant increased damages.) See, e.g., Note, The Disclosure Function of the Patent System (Or Lack Thereof), 118 HARV. L. REV. 2007 (2005). Seagate reduced that concern. Does Halo exacerbate it?
5. Do we need a doctrine of willful infringement? Is there a risk that without some sort of damages enhancement infringers will just copy patented inventions with impunity, secure in the knowledge that they will only have to pay a reasonable royalty? Or does the risk of being enjoined mid-production serve as an adequate deterrent? See generally Roger D. Blair \& Thomas F. Cotter, Intellectual Property: Economic and Legal Dimensions of Rights and Remedies 42-66 (2005) (modeling compensation and deterrence in patent cases, and discussing doctrinal implications).


*Respondents invoke a footnote in Safeco where we explained that in considering whether there had been a knowing or reckless violation of the Fair Credit Reporting Act, a showing of bad faith was not relevant absent a showing of objective recklessness. See 551 U.S., at 70, n. 20. But our precedents make clear that "bad-faith infringement" is an independent basis for enhancing patent damages. Ato Mfg. Co. v. Convertible Top Replacement Co., 377 U.S. 476, 508 (1964); see supra, at 2 5, 9 10; see also Sifco, 551 U.S., at 57 (noting that "'willfully' is a word of many meanings whose construction is often dependent on the context in which it appears" (some internal quotation marks omitted)).