
When a team is organized via contract, team members retain ownership and control over the productive assets used to produce their part of the team's goods or services. The autonomy of each team member makes it difficult for a team to adjust to changed circumstances and exposes the team to the costs of opportunistic threats of withdrawal. If a team member becomes less valuable than was expected ex ante, he may be reluctant to agree to a readjustment of his contract that accurately reflects his current value to the team. Likewise, if a team member becomes more valuable than was expected ex ante, other team members may be equally reluctant to grant an upward adjustment in the payment that team member will receive. Additionally, team members may request adjustments when an omniscient observer, but not other team members, would be able to see that the request is unjustified. As a result, teams organized via contract will experience substantial costs from having team members' compensation and incentives misaligned and from the haggling to correct these misalignments that results.

The advantage of organizing as a firm is the avoidance of these haggling costs. As Coase noted, a key aspect of a firm is the allocation of resources at the direction of the entrepreneur. The owner's power to make unilaterally all management decisions - what is made, how it is made, who is hired and fired, and who is paid what-allows the firm to adapt quickly to changed circumstances.

The potential disadvantage of organizing as a firm for an employee is that in surrendering autonomous control over her own business, she becomes subject to the employer's opportunism. Thus, a key organizational problem for all firms is how to optimally minimize the risk to which the employee is so exposed. A key organizational problem for jointly owned firms is how to allocate management rights and responsibilities between and among co-owners and how to ensure that the entrepreneurial function carried out by the entrepreneur in the classic firm is carried out efficiently in a firm where ownership power is not united in one person.
